Myxomycetes:   Biology, Systematics,   Biogeography, and   Ecology Page left intentionally blank Edited by Steven L. . Stephenson University of Arkansas. .  Fayetteville. 
 AR United States Carlos Rojas University of Costa Rica. .  San Pedro de Montes de Oca. .  Costa Rica  Myxomycetes:  Biology. 
 Systematics. .   Biogeography. .  and  Ecology Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier 125 London Wall. 
 London EC2Y 5AS. .  United Kingdom 525 B Street. .  Suite 1800. 
 San Diego. .  CA 92101-4495. .  United States 50 Hampshire Street. .  5th Floor. 
 Cambridge. .  MA 02139   United States The Boulevard. .  Langford Lane. .  Kidlington. 
 Oxford OX5 1GB. .  United Kingdom Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. . No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means. .  elec- tronic or mechanical. 
 including photocopying. .  recording. .  or any information storage and retrieval  system. 
 without permission in writing from the publisher. . Details on how to seek permission. 
 further  information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations  such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency. .  can be found at our  website: www.elsevier.com/permissions. . This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the  Publisher (other than as may be noted herein). 
Notices Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. . As new research and experience  broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treat- ment may become necessary. . Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating  and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. . In using such  information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, includ- ing parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. . To the fullest extent of the law. 
 neither the Publisher nor the authors. .  contributors. .  or editors. 
 assume  any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability. .   negligence or otherwise. .  or from any use or operation of any methods. 
 products   instructions. .  or  ideas contained in the material herein. . Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN: 978-0-12-805089-7 For information on all Academic Press publications visit our website at   https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals Publisher: Sara Tenney Acquisition Editor: Kristi Gomez Editorial Project Manager: Pat Gonzalez Production Project Manager: Chris Wortley Designer: Matthew Limbert Typeset by Thomson Digital v Contents Contributors  xiii Preface  xv Introduction  xvii 1. 
 The Myxomycetes: Introduction, Basic Biology,   Life Cycles, Genetics, and Reproduction Harold W. . Keller, Sydney E. . Everhart, Courtney M. 
Kilgore Introduction  1 Morphology of Fruiting Bodies  3 Fruiting Body Types  4 Myxomycete Terminology  9 Myxomycete Life Cycle Stages  28 Genetics and Reproduction  35 Acknowledgments  37 References  37 2. .  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes Bruce Ing, Steven L. . Stephenson The Early Period  41 The First Scientific Studies  45 Arthur and Gulielma Lister  46 More Recent Studies in Europe  49 Studies in the United States  56 Studies Throughout the World  59 Future Studies of Myxomycetes  67 References  68 3. 
 The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes Dmitry V. . Leontyev   Martin Schnittler Introduction  83 Phylogenetic Revolution in Taxonomy  85 Marker Genes for Myxomycetes  86 vi    Contents Obtaining Sequences of Myxomycete DNA  88 How to Build a Tree?  90 Where are Myxomycetes in the Tree of Life?  92 Major Branches of the Myxomycete Tree  95 Morphology Versus Phylogeny  100 References  101 4. .  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes Dennis Miller, Ramesh Padmanabhan, Subha N. 
Sarcar Introduction  107 Nucleolar DNA: Minichromosomes rDNA Genes  107 Chromosomes and Chromosomal DNA  108 Chromosome Number and Telomeres  109 Gene Content and Chromosomal DNA  110 The Mitochondrial RNA Polymerase Gene. .    an Example of Protein Coding Genes   on Nuclear DNA  110 Small. 
 Noncoding RNAs  112 tRNA Gene Structure  112 tRNA Anticodons. .  Codon/Anticodon   Interactions. 
 and the Genetic Code  113 Mitochondrial DNA in Myxomycetes  114 The Relationship of Myxomycetes Relative   to Other Clades in the Amoebozoa Based   on Mitochondrial DNA Characteristics  114 Comparison of the Mitochondrial DNA Genomes   of Three Representative Amoebozoans  115 Mitochondrial Gene Expression   in the Amoebozoa  118 Evolutionary Implications of mtDNA   Structure and Features  123 Relationships Within the Myxomycetes Based   on mtDNA Structure  123 Linear mF Mitochondrial Plasmid  126 Variation in the Structure of the mtDNAs   From Different Strains of Physarum  127 mtDNA Structure in Didymium Iridis  128 Mitochondrial Bar Coding and mtDNA Phylogenies   of Myxomycetes  129 Insertional RNA Editing in the Myxomycetes  131 Specificity of RNA Editing Site Location  133 Specificity of Inserted Nucleotide Identity  134 Evolution of RNA Editing. .  Variation in Editing   Site Location  135 Concluding Remarks and Areas of Future   Research  138 References  139 Contents    vii 5. 
 Molecular Techniques and Current Research   Approaches Laura M. . Walker, Thomas Hoppe, Margaret E. . Silliker Part A: A Synthesis of the Current Knowledge   on Molecular Techniques Used for the Recording   of Biodiversity and Ecological Analyses  145 Introduction  145 Nucleic Acid Isolation  147 DNA Isolation  147 RNA Isolation  148 Nucleic Acid Amplification and Applications  148 Ribosomal Small Subunit (SSU)  148 Elongation Factor-1α  149 Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS)  149 Cytochrome c Oxidase (COI)  150 Sequencing and Applications of Gene Amplification  150 Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (TRFLP)  151 Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE)  151 High-Throughput Sequencing  152 Concluding Remarks  153 Part B: Comparative Molecular Biology and Use   of Myxomycetes as Model Organisms  154 Myxomycetes as Model Organisms: Promises. 
 Disappointments. .   and Discoveries  154 The Cell Cycle  154 Somatic Incompatibility Systems  155 Plasmodial Structure. .  Motility   Behavior   and Learning  155 Group I Introns in the Myxomycetes  157 Molecular Approaches to Studying Development   in Myxomycetes  160 Transfection of Physarum polycephalum and RNAi  162 The First Complete Myxomycete Genome  164 References  165 6. .  Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes Qi Wang. .  Yu Li   Pu Liu Introduction  175 Spore Germination  175 Amoeboflagellate Cells  177 Plasmodium  178 Sporulation  181 Metabolites of Myxomycetes  181 Metabolites From Members of the Ceratiomyxales  182 Metabolites From Members of the Liceales  182 viii    Contents Metabolites From Members of the Trichiales  186 Metabolites From Members of the Physarales  187 Metabolites From Members of the Stemonitales  191 Research Methods Used in the Study of Metabolites  192 Antibacterial Activity  193 Antitumor Activity  193 Cytotoxic Activity  194 Antioxidant Activity  195 Research Methods in the Study of Bioactivity  195 Chemical Characteristics  195 Acknowledgments  197 References  197 7. .  Taxonomy and Systematics: Current Knowledge   and Approaches on the Taxonomic Treatment   of Myxomycetes Carlos Lado. 
 Uno Eliasson Introduction  205 Definition of Taxonomy. .  Systematics. 
 and Nomenclature  206 Brief History of the Taxonomy of Myxomycetes  210 Gross Systematics Within Myxomycetes  212 Exosporous Myxomycetes  213 Endosporous Myxomycetes  214 Taxonomic Literature on the Myxomycetes  221 Classification of the Myxomycetes (From Class to Genera. .    With References to the Protologue and a Brief Diagnosis   of the Most Relevant Distinctive Characters)  222 The New Era of Taxonomy: How New Technologies   Can Help to Resolve Classical Taxonomic Problems  237 Virtual Libraries and Herbaria  240 Repositories of Biodiversity Information  241 Projects  241 Banks of Data  242 Virtual Encyclopedias  243 Web Pages  243 Software  244 Challenges in Taxonomy  244 Acknowledgments  245 References  246 8. .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes Yuri K. . Novozhilov, Adam W. 
Rollins   Martin Schnittler Introduction  253 Methods of Study  254 Field Surveys  254 Moist Chamber Cultures  256 Contents    ix Agar Cultures  261 Metacommunity Analysis  262 Data Evaluation for Diversity Studies in Myxomycetes  263 Microhabitat Descriptions  266 Environmental Factors and Ecological Niche  268 Acidity of Substrate (pH)  270 Microhabitats and Ecological Assemblages of Myxomycetes  272 Ground Litter  273 Coarse Woody Debris  275 Bark of Living Woody Plants  276 Aerial Microhabitats  278 Tropical Lianas  280 Weathered Dung of Herbivorous Animals  281 Soil  282 Aquatic Habitats  282 Effect of Disturbance Events on Assemblages of Myxomycetes  283 Phenology of Sporulation (Seasonality of Myxomycetes)  283 Relationships With Other Organisms  284 Conclusions  285 Acknowledgments  286 References  286 9. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes Martin Schnittler, Nikki Heherson A. 
Dagamac, Yuri K. . Novozhilov Introduction  299 Spore Dispersal as a Key Feature for Myxomycetes  299 Myxomycete Biogeography—What Can We See?  302 Biogeographic Hypotheses About Myxomycete Distribution  304 Two-Hundred Years of Fruiting Body-Based Diversity   Research in Myxomycetes  305 Diversity and Species Composition of Myxomycete   Communities From Major Ecosystems of the World  309 Tundra. .  Forest-Tundra and Subantarctic Habitats  309 Boreal Forests (Taiga) and Subalpine/Montane   Coniferous Forests  310 Temperate Forests  311 Mediterranean Forests. 
 Woodlands. .  Scrub  312 Tropical and Subtropical Forests  312 Steppes and Prairies  315 Subalpine and Alpine Grasslands  315 Deserts and Other Arid Areas  316 Coastal Habitats and Mangroves  317 Agricultural and Urban Habitats  318 Heathlands  319 Savannahs and Semi-Arid Grasslands  319 Acknowledgments  319 References  319 x    Contents 10. 
Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes Diana Wrigley de Basanta. .  Arturo Estrada-Torres Introduction  333 Field Collections  334 Field Collections: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints  339 Isolation of Myxomycetes by Laboratory Culture  340 Moist Chamber Cultures  340 Cold Moist Chamber Cultures  345 Moist Chambers: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints  346 Agar Cultures  350 Agar Cultures: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints  353 Environmental Sequencing  354 Environmental Sequencing: Discussion of Advantages   and Constraints  356 Conclusions  357 Acknowledgments  357 References  357 11. 
Uses and Potential: Summary of the Biomedical   and Engineering Applications of Myxomycetes   in the 21st Century Hanh T.M. . Tran   Andrew Adamatzky Part A: Bioactive Compounds From Myxomycetes  365 Myxomycete Antimicrobial Compounds  366 Myxomycete Anticancer Compounds  369 Other Bioactive Compounds Obtained   From Myxomycetes  373 Initial Studies on the Use of Myxomycete   Lipids for Biodiesel Production  373 Part B: Myxomycetes in Unconventional Computing   and Sensing  374 Shortest Path  375 Spanning Tree  377 Approximation of Transport Networks  377 Space Exploration  379 Tactile Sensor  380 Color sensor  381 Chemical Sensor  381 Robot Controllers  382 Music generation  383 References  383 Contents    xi 12. . Myxomycetes in Education: The Use of These   Organisms in Promoting Active and Engaged Learning Katherine E. . Winsett, Thomas Edison E. 
dela Cruz     Diana Wrigley de Basanta Introduction  389 Techniques  392 Collecting Myxomycetes in the Field  392 Setting Up Moist Chamber Cultures  393 Storing Fruiting Bodies and Maintaining a Collection  394 Culture of Myxomycetes on Agar  394 Identifying Myxomycetes  396 Collecting and Classifying Myxomycetes  397 Observations  397 Observing Feeding Behavior of Myxomycetes  401 Assessing Ecological Patterns of Myxomycetes  401 High School and Beyond  402 Developing Myxomycete Infomaterials for Promoting   Biodiversity Conservation  406 Photographing Myxomycetes  407 Conclusions  410 Acknowledgments  411 References  411 13. . Myxomycetes in the 21st Century Carlos Rojas. 
 Tetiana Kryvomaz Connection With the World  413 Research Perspectives  419 Conservation and Management  424 Putting the Pieces Together  431 References  433 Index  437 Page left intentionally blank xiii Contributors Andrew Adamatzky The Unconventional Computing Centre. .  University of the  West of England. .  Bristol   United Kingdom Nikki Heherson A. . Dagamac Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology, Ernst  Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany Thomas Edison E. 
dela Cruz University of Santo Tomas. .  Manila   Philippines Uno Eliasson University of Gothenburg. .  Gothenburg. .  Sweden Arturo Estrada-Torres Behavioural Biology Centre. 
 The Autonomous  University of Tlaxcala. .  Tlaxcala   Mexico Sydney E. 
Everhart University of Nebraska. .  Lincoln   NE   United States of America Thomas Hoppe Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology. 
 Ernst Moritz Arndt  University. .  Greifswald. .  Germany Bruce Ing Applied Science and Environmental Biology. 
 University of Chester. .   Chester   United Kingdom Harold W. 
Keller University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, MO;   Botanical Research Institute of Texas, Fort Worth, TX, United States of America Courtney M. . Kilgore Robeson Community College. .  Lumberton. 
 NC    United States of America Tetiana Kryvomaz Kyiv National Construction and Architecture University. .   Kyiv   Ukraine Carlos Lado Royal Botanic Garden (CSIC). 
 Madrid   Spain Dmitry V. . Leontyev H.S. . Skovoroda Kharkiv National Pedagogical University. 
  Kharkiv   Ukraine Yu Li Engineering Research Center of Chinese Ministry of Education for Edible and  Medicinal Fungi. .  Jilin Agricultural University. .  Changchun. 
 Jilin   PR China Pu Liu Engineering Research Center of Chinese Ministry of Education for Edible and  Medicinal Fungi. .  Jilin Agricultural University. .  Changchun. .  Jilin   PR China Dennis Miller University of Texas at Dallas. 
 Richardson. .  TX   United States Yuri K. . Novozhilov Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences,  St. . Petersburg. .  Russia Ramesh Padmanabhan University of Texas at Dallas. .  Richardson. 
 TX   United States xiv    Contributors Carlos Rojas Engineering Research Institute. .  University of Costa Rica. .  San Pedro de  Montes de Oca. .  Costa Rica Adam W. 
Rollins Lincoln Memorial University, Harrogate, TN, United States Subha N. . Sarcar University of Texas at Dallas. .  Richardson. 
 TX   United States Martin Schnittler Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology. .  Ernst Moritz Arndt  University Greifswald. .  Greifswald. .  Germany Margaret E. 
Silliker DePaul University, Chicago, IL, United States Steven L. . Stephenson University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States Hanh T.M. . Tran Ho Chi Minh International University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Laura M. 
Walker Smith College. .  Clark Science Center. .  Northampton. 
 MA    United States Qi Wang Engineering Research Center of Chinese Ministry of Education for Edible  and Medicinal Fungi. .  Jilin Agricultural University. .  Changchun. .  Jilin   PR China Katherine E. 
Winsett Wake Technical Community College. .  Raleigh   NC    United States Diana Wrigley de Basanta Royal Botanic Garden (CSIC). 
 Madrid   Spain xv Preface The myxomycetes (also called plasmodial slime molds or myxogastrids) have  not been studied with the same intensity and geographical effort that have char- acterized many other groups of organisms. . However, they are comparatively  well known for being a group of microorganisms during much of their life  cycle. . The reproductive structures (fruiting bodies) produced by myxomycetes  are often large enough be visible with the naked eye. . Numerous examples are  beautiful and their colorful miniature structures often capture the attention of  both the trained and untrained eye. 
It is commonplace to hear a “wow” or a similar expression of surprise when  someone observes a specimen of myxomycete under a hand lens or microscope  for the very first time. . In fact, the same thing still happens to most “myxomycete  people” when they see a new or unusual myxomycete, even after many years  of studying these organisms. . Edward O  Wilson popularized the concept of bio- philia, which refers to the innate tendency of humans to seek connections with  nature and other forms of life. 
Clearly, this applies to the microscopic world, in- cluding the myxomycetes, and is not likely to change any time soon. . Hopefully,  with this volume, more people will have the opportunity to develop an interest  in both myxomycetes and other fascinating microscopic organisms as well. . It is our desire that this volume serve as a source of information that can help  increase general bioliteracy by opening the door to the world of myxomycetes  for the layperson. .  as well as representing a comprehensive reference work on  the biology. 
 systematics. .  biogeography. 
 and ecology of the group for the ex- pert. . In the pages of this volume there is a considerable body of information  on myxomycetes and their relationship with the world around them. .  as well  as the modern scientific context within which they have been (and continue to  be) studied. 
However   as is often the case with any comprehensive treatment of  a group of organisms. .  these pages contain an even larger number of descrip- tions and accounts relating to laboratory and field stories. 
 lifelong friendships  and professional relationships. .  academic and nonacademic setbacks. .  financial  stress. .  the problems of bureaucracy. 
 and hundreds of thousands of miles traveled  worldwide—using every possible means of transportation known to humans— all in the ongoing effort to learn more about myxomycetes. . For this reason, the  publication of this volume and all the work it represented was celebrated even  before the first words were written. . xvi    Preface This volume is the product of a collective effort of many individuals who  have generated information on myxomycetes over a period of several decades. .  Of these, only the names of 29 coauthors from 11 countries appear. 
Conse- quently. .  we would like to acknowledge the extremely relevant support of field  assistants. .  laboratory technicians. .  logistical staff members. .  and many others  who have enabled the named individuals to generate the information presented  in this volume. 
At the same time. .  we would like to acknowledge the support of  multiple funding agencies over the years. 
 without which much of the informa- tion that we now know about myxomycetes would not have been possible to  obtain. . Our strong desire to communicate the scientific results that have been  accumulated on myxomycetes has been the driving force in producing this vol- ume. . We have worked alongside numerous contributors, developing an updated  and comprehensive treatment of a group of microorganisms for which the most  comparable publication appeared almost 50 years ago. 
Since the present volume  contains the work of many individuals from an earlier era. .  we would also like  to acknowledge those now-historic figures who. .  in one way or another. 
 were  responsible for generating curiosity in others and thus provided the inspiration  for modern researchers to carry out studies on this beautiful and challenging  group of microorganisms. . At some point in our lives, there was someone who captured our attention  and brought us into the world of myxomycetes. 
We all know the name of this  person, different for each one, who influenced our careers more than any one  of us could have known at the time. . Hopefully, through this volume, the legacy  of all of those who came before us can have a similar impact on someone,  somewhere. 
Steven L  Stephenson Fayetteville, AR, United States Carlos Rojas Turrialba, Costa Rica March 4, 2017 xvii Introduction Steven L. . Stephenson*. 
 Carlos Rojas** *University of Arkansas. .  Fayetteville. .  AR   United States **Engineering Research Institute. .  University of Costa Rica. .  San Pedro de Montes de Oca. 
  Costa Rica One of the earliest branches of the eukaryotic tree of life consists of an as- semblage of amoeboid protists referred to as the supergroup Amoebozoa  (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2010)  The most diverse members of the Amoeboza are  the eumycetozoans, commonly referred to as slime molds, and the best known  slime molds are the myxomycetes. . The earliest published reference to a myxo- mycete (apparently Lycogala epidendrum) appears to have been made by the  German botanist Thomas Panckow (1654). .  but some of the larger myxomy- cetes. .  such as Fuligo septica. 
 have surely been noticed by humans for many  thousands of years. . Since their “discovery” by scientists, the myxomycetes (also known as  plasmodial slime molds, acellular slime molds, or myxogastrids) have been  variously classified as plants, animals, or fungi. 
Because they produce aerial. .   spore-bearing structures which resemble those of certain fungi. .  and typically  occur in some of the same ecological situations as fungi. 
 myxomycetes tra- ditionally have been studied almost exclusively by mycologists (Martin and  Alexopoulos. .  1969)  Indeed, the name most closely associated with the group,  first used by Link (1833), is derived from the Greek words myxa (which means  slime) and mycetes (referring to fungi). . However, abundant molecular evidence  now confirms that they are amoebozoans and not fungi (Baldauf, 2008; Bapteste  et al., 2002; Yoon et al., 2008). . Interestingly. 
 the fact that myxomycetes are  protists was first pointed out by De Bary (1864). .  more than a century and a half  ago. .  and he proposed the name Mycetozoa (literally meaning “fungus animal”)  for the group. . However, myxomycetes continued to be considered as fungi by  most mycologists until the latter half of the 20th century. . Approximately 1000 morphologically recognizable species of myxomyce- tes have been described. 
The traditional approach has been to assign these to six  different taxonomic orders. .  but recent evidence derived from molecular studies  suggests that these orders do not hold together as they have been circumscribed  in the past. 
As such, the system of classification used for the myxomycetes  needs to be revised. . xviii    Introduction Myxomycetes are free-living predators of other eukaryotic protists and bac- teria and have been recorded in every terrestrial habitat investigated to date. 
The  two trophic stages in the life cycle (amoeboflagellates and plasmodia) are usual- ly cryptic, but the fruiting bodies are often large enough to be observed directly  in nature. . Fruiting bodies release spores that are dispersed by air or, more rarely,  by animal vectors. . Under favorable conditions, these spores germinate and give  rise to amoeboflagellates, from which the plasmodium is ultimately derived. .  Myxomycetes are associated with a wide variety of different microhabitats, the  most important of which are coarse woody debris, ground litter, aerial litter, and  the bark surface of living trees. 
Specimens for study can be obtained as fruiting  bodies that have developed in the field under natural conditions or cultured in  the laboratory. . A substantial body of data on the worldwide biodiversity and dis- tribution of the reproductive stage of myxomycetes has been assembled over the  past 200 years. .  but only limited information is available for their trophic stages. .  More recently, an appreciable body of data has become available on various  aspects of the biology, phylogeny, and genetics of these organisms. . The primary objective of this volume is to provide an overview of the major- ity of what is currently known about this truly fascinating group of organisms. .  This volume represents what might be regarded as a greatly expanded treatment  of the type of information provided by Gray and Alexopoulos (1968) in Biology  of the Myxomycetes and Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) in The Myxomycetes. 
  both compiled almost a half century ago. . Virtually all of the more recent field-based publications relating to myxomy- cetes have focused on the distributional aspects of the group or the description  of species new to science. . This is largely due to efforts to increase the informa- tion available on these organisms in regions of the world where studies had  never been carried out. . Based on the body of new information that has been  generated, it seems appropriate to produce an updated, comprehensive treat- ment of the biology, ecology, and taxonomy of myxomycetes. . Furthermore. 
 an increased focus on molecular biology in recent decades  has greatly increased the understanding of the genetics. .  phylogenetics. 
 and bio- chemical systems present in the different groups of myxomycetes. .  and this type  of critical information calls for a reinterpretation of myxomycete biology within  a modern framework. . This volume also represents an effort to bring what is currently known about  the biology and potential applications of myxomycetes to as broad an audience  as possible. 
The intent of the editors and the collaborators has been to reach  out to students, naturalists, and academics equally. . Although this is a difficult  task to accomplish, all of the individuals who have contributed to the informa- tion presented herein have worked with this in mind. . The present volume has  been designed to include important. 
 updated   and revised chapters on the basic  biology. .  ecology   and taxonomy of this group of microorganisms. .  along with  discrete sections on such subjects as myxomycete biogeography; the history of  Introduction    xix studies of the group; the results of molecular-based studies; their management  and conservation; and their educational value and potential applicability in the  context of modern learning objectives for students at every academic level. . The chapter authors and coauthors were drawn from a group of acknowl- edged authorities who work with myxomycetes. . Such an effort to include so  many coauthors and a wide range of content is remarkable in the sense that  a comprehensive volume including cross-related information and various per- spectives on myxomycetes has not previously been produced. . In this sense. .  the  present volume also has an appreciable historical value with respect to docu- menting the current state of the art with respect to investigations directed toward  myxomycetes in the first part of the 21st century. 
From a comparative point of  view. .  readers of this volume will have the opportunity to understand how studies  of myxomycetes carried out over the past couple of centuries have often lagged  behind comparable studies of many other groups of organisms. . However, the  relevance and extent of the accomplishments made by a number of past and cur- rent individuals interested in the group also are described. 
In addition to chapters dealing with different aspects of myxomycete bi- ology. .  such as biochemistry. 
 phylogeny. .  taxonomy   ecology   and distribution. 
  readers will find that contextual topics. .  such as history of research. 
 isolation  techniques. .  biophilic potential. .  uses and applications. .  and educational value. .   have also been included. 
The idea behind this strategy has been to incorporate  different approaches that are normally not considered in “more difficult” scien- tific texts but which are very important if one is to understand the context within  which myxomycetes have been studied. . An advantage of this type of approach  is that readers are provided with additional tools to generate new lines of study  within a modern context. 
We invite the readers of this volume to become immersed in the fascinating  world of myxomycetes. . We encourage naturalists, science professionals, and  policy makers to include these microorganisms in their agendas. . We hope this  volume generates necessary insights for an integrated development of studies  of myxomycetes and energizes more people to appreciate the role of microor- ganisms in nature and. 
 perhaps more importantly. .  the hidden and yet simple  beauty of the natural microscopic world that lies beyond the capability of the  human eye. . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are indebted to a number of individuals who were willing to review one or more chap- ters for us. 
These include Gražina Adamonyté. .  Charles Butterwell. .  Jim Clark. 
 Uno Eliasson. .   Myriam de Haan. 
 Eggehard Holler. .  Roland McHugh. .  Edward Haskins. 
 Bruce Ing. .  Genaro  Martinez. .  Wolfgang Marwin. .  Anna Ronikier. 
 Wayne Rosing. .  Martin Schnittler. .  Frederick  Spiegel. .  and Diana Wrigley de Basanta. 
We also thank Stephanie Somerville for the format  revision of the complete volume. . xx    Introduction REFERENCES Baldauf, S., 2008. 
An overview of the phylogeny and diversity of eukaryotes. . J  Syst  Evol  46,  263–273. .  Bapteste, E., Brinkmann, H., Lee, J.A., Moore, D.V., Sensen, C.W., Gordon, P., Durufle, L., Gaas- terland, T., Lopez, P., Muller, M., Philippe, H., 2002. 
The analysis of 100 genes supports the  grouping of three highly divergent amoebae: Dictyostelium, Entamoeba, and Mastigamoeba. .  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 99, 1414–1419. .  De Bary, A., 1864. 
Die Mycetozoen (Schleimpilze). . Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Niedersten  Organismen, Leipzig, Germany. . Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., Baldauf, S.L.,  2010. 
Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (mycetozoa). . Protist 161, 55–70. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press, New York, NY. .  Link, J.H.F., 1833. . Handbuch zur Erkennung der nutzbarsten und am häufigsten vorkommenden  Gewächse, vol. . 3  Spenerschen Buchhandlung, Berlin, Germany, pp. . 405–422, 432–433. . Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Panckow, T., 1654. . Herbarium Portabile. . Berlin, Germany. 
Yoon, H.S., Grant, J., Teckle, Y.I., Wu, M., Chaon, B.C., Cole, J.C., Logsdon, J.M., Patterson, D.J.,  Bhattacharya, D., Katz, L.A., 2008. . Broadly sampled multigene trees of eukaryotes. . BMC  Evol  Biol  8, 14   1 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00001-9 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 1 The Myxomycetes: Introduction,  Basic Biology, Life Cycles,  Genetics, and Reproduction Harold W. . Keller*,**, Sydney E. . Everhart†, Courtney M. . Kilgore‡ *University of Central Missouri. 
 Warrensburg. .  MO   United States of America; **Botanical Research   Institute of Texas. .  Fort Worth. .  TX   United States of America; †University of Nebraska. .  Lincoln   NE    United States of America; ‡Robeson Community College. .  Lumberton. 
 NC   United States of America INTRODUCTION What are myxomycetes? They are life forms that have baffled naturalists and  scientists for more than 300 years. . The first recorded observation in 1654 of the  myxomycete Lycogala epidendrum fruiting bodies was by the German mycolo- gist Thomas Pankow in his Herbarium Portatile. .  oder behendes Kräuter- und  Gewächsbuch (see Chapter 2). 
Placement of the myxomycetes on the tree of  life was controversial because different life cycle stages were emphasized over  time by different researchers. . A portion of the life cycle was considered animal- like and included in the Animal Kingdom; another portion was plant-like and  included in the Plant Kingdom; and still another portion was considered fungal- like and included in the Fungi Kingdom. . These organisms were also placed in  the Protista Kingdom and more recently classified as Amoebozoans based on  molecular evidence. . The historical name used for this group of organisms is myxomycetes (pro- nounced “mix-oh-my-seats”). 
This name was introduced by H.F. . Link in 1833  in his Handbuch zur Erkennung der nutzbarsten und am häufigsten vorkom- menden Gewächse. . This treatment was used by the American myxomycolo- gists Thomas H. 
Macbride, George W. . Martin, and Constantine J. . Alexopoulos. 
 Another name for the group is Mycetozoa (literally fungus animals). .  intro- duced by the German mycologist Anton de Bary in 1859 and used mostly by  European myxomycologists. .  especially the Listers (Arthur H. 
and daughter  2     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Gulielma) in three editions of their books published in 1894, 1911, and 1925  (Lister, 1894, 1911, 1925). . The complete history of the taxonomy used for the  myxomycetes and their placement in modern systems of classification are cov- ered in detail in Chapters 3 and 7. . A review of myxomycete taxonomic history highlighted the past. 
 present    and future (Keller. .  2012)   and encompassed the years from the 1700s and Lin- naeus. 
 through de Bary. .  Rostafińsky. .  the Listers. .  Macbride   Martin   Alexopou- los. 
 and Farr   the latter four all being American myxomycologists of more recent  time. . This paper chronicles the history of the University of Iowa Myxomycete  Collection and collectors. .  including eventual transfer of the collection to the  National Fungus Collections (BPI) in Beltsville. 
 MD   USA  The Myxomycete  Collection at BPI numbers between 50,000 and 60,000 specimens, including  many important type specimens. . A current updated online inventory of myxo- mycete taxa, scientific binomials, and their authorities was consulted, and au- thority names will not be repeated here (Lado, 2005–16). . Myxomycetes are easy to find if you know what they look like and when  and where to look for them. . Generally, myxomycete fruiting bodies occur  wherever there is sufficient decaying organic matter with adequate mois- ture and moderate temperatures. 
Some of the favorite collecting habitats on  ground sites include forested areas with decaying logs. .  tree stumps. 
 accu- mulated decaying leaves and needle litter. .  bark mulching around trees and  shrubs. 
 stacked wood piles. .  sawdust piles. .  compost heaps and garden mulch- ing. .  hothouses with organic peat moss. .  basal dead leaves of ornamental flow- ers in flower beds. 
 on piles of straw or baled hay in fields exposed to the  weather elements. .  on bark of living trees and woody vines. .  on bark of living  apple trees in apple orchards. 
 on living lawn grass. .  and on herbivorous dung  in pastures (Keller and Braun. .  1999)  Many species have small fruiting bodies only a few millimeters in diam- eter and require a hand lens of 20× for detection. 
Weather-related conditions  that favor the greatest diversity of species of myxomycetes are rainy periods  that last several days with diurnal temperatures between 20 and 38°C; this  coincides with the summer months of June–September in central and south- eastern USA. . Nivicolous (snowbank) myxomycetes occur in high-altitude  mountainous regions of the world and develop under melting margins of  snow cover in early springtime. .  usually in April and May in North America. 
 In contrast. .  desert species of myxomycetes exhibit a surprising biodiver- sity in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona. .  occurring on the woody skeletons of  cacti and dead parts of living plants in contact with the ground. 
Many new  species have been discovered in arid habitats and desert regions through- out the world. .  whereas other species appear to be cosmopolitan and occur  wherever decaying vegetation is present. .  for example. 
 the tropics. .  temper- ate regions. 
 wetlands (such as swamps. .  marshes   and bogs). .  grasslands. .  and  even in the colder regions of the Arctic tundra and sub-Antarctic (Keller and  Braun. .  1999; Stephenson and Stempen. 
 1994)  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    3 MORPHOLOGY OF FRUITING BODIES The spore-producing fruiting bodies of myxomycetes vary considerably in size. .  Some are tiny, less than 100 µm, and require microscopic examination; others  are much larger, conspicuous, and visible to the naked eye, with dimensions up  to 76 × 56 cm. 
The most common fruiting body type is a stalked sporangium,  usually of definite size, shape, and color, with internal structural parts that are  used to identify species. . Stalked sporangia with spores propagate most spe- cies of myxomycetes. .  each with a combination of morphological characteristics  either present or absent; externally a hypothallus and stalk. .  and internally a  columella and a capillitium (system of threads) interspersed with spores and  surrounded by an acellular peridium or wall (Fig. 
1 1)  The fruiting body stage is used in dichotomous or synoptic keys to identify  a particular species. . Some shapes and colors are so distinctive that a species can  be picture keyed or sight identified. . However, most species require microscopic  examination of spores and internal structures. . Many species have “look-a-like”  species that occur in similar habitats, with similar features, and require a careful  FIGURE 1.1 Sporangium of Echinostelium arboreum with labeled structural parts. . 4     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology collecting and microscopic characterization using myxomycete monographs. 
 The world monograph. .  The Myxomycetes. 
 by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969)  was published almost 50 years ago. .  and is still considered by many to be the  most authoritative text on the taxonomy of the myxomycetes. . It has many tech- nical terms used in species descriptions, but lacks a glossary with definitions or  illustrations of descriptive terms. . This limits its use by beginners. 
 where more  recently published books include such resources—for example. .  Stephenson and  Stempen (1994) and Keller and Braun (1999)—and are a better choice for be- ginning students of myxomycetes. . None of these books include many new spe- cies described in the last 50 years. 
There are now approximately 980 described  species, based on the latest count in Lado (2005–16). . Therefore, a more com- prehensive list of myxomycete-related terms is defined here, and in some cases  illustrated, with species examples and literature sources. . The reader should con- sult the life cycle and structural terminology definitions, to better understand the  terms that follow in the topical sections. 
FRUITING BODY TYPES There are four fruiting body forms or types: sporangium, plasmodiocarp, aetha- lium, and pseudoaethalium. . The sporangium may be stalked or sessile, often  with a spherical-shaped spore case, and with a peridium that is acellular and  surrounds the spores at some point during their development (Fig. . 1 1)  Spores  are said to develop internally, and fruiting bodies are referred to as endosporous. .  Traditionally, there have been five recognized orders of endosporous myxo- mycetes: Echinosteliales, Liceales, Physarales, Stemonitales, and Trichiales. .  However, as outlined in Chapter 3, these taxa require revision based on recent  molecular data. 
In certain minute species. .  a microscopic protoplasmodium pro- duces only one sporangium. .  as in the genus Echinostelium (Martin and Alexo- poulos. .  1969) and a minute aphanoplasodium as in the genus Macbrideola  (Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969)  In contrast, phaneroplasmodial species, such  as Physarum polycephalum (Fig. . 1 2)   produce a plasmodium that may grow to  cover an area of a meter or more and form thousands of sporangia under ideal  conditions (Keller and Braun. 
 1999; Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969; Stephenson  and Stempen. 
 1994)  The plasmodiocarp is a sessile, elongated, worm-like, branched network or  ring-shaped fruiting body, formed when the plasmodium concentrates proto- plasm in situ in main veins during development. . Hemitrichia serpula (Fig. 
1.3)  is one of the best examples of an entirely plasmodiocarpous habit (Keller and  Braun. .  1999; Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969) as is Perichaena chrysosperma. .   which is sporangiate to plasmdiocarpous (Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969)  Sev- eral other species develop plasmodiocarps, with many in the Physarales. . For  example, Physarum compressum forms both stalked and sessile sporangia and  plasmodiocarps (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969) in the same cluster of fruiting  bodies. . Physarum cinereum forms sessile sporangia to short plasmodiocarps  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    5 FIGURE 1.2 Bright yellow phaneroplasmodium of Physarum polycephalum on agar surface. . FIGURE 1.3 Plasmodiocarp of Hemitrichia serpula with peridium opened exposing yellow  capillitial threads intermingled with yellow light-colored spores. . 6     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology (Keller and Braun, 1999; Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969), as do Physarum su- perbum (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969) and P. 
serpula (Martin and Alexopou- los, 1969). . Laboratory experiments confirm that a single plasmodium can give  rise to both stalked and sessile sporangia that intergrade into short or elongate  plasmodiocarps of various lengths. . The aethalium is a large, sessile, round, or mound-shaped fruiting body  formed from a single plasmodium, and is formed by all species in genera Fuligo  and Lycogala (Figs. . 1.4 and 1.5) (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969; Stephenson  and Stempen, 1994). . These are the most widely known fruiting body types due  to their relatively large size and frequent occurrence in urban landscapes. 
A  world record aethalium of F. . septica (76 × 56 cm) was discovered recently  on the campus of the Botanical Research Institute of Texas on bark mulch  (Keller et al., 2016). . Although similar in outer appearance to an aethalium, the pseudoaethalium  represents the fusion of many sporangia packed together (Fig. . 1 6)  The degree  to which sporangia retain internal side-walls varies. . Individual sporangia are  only partially fused in species of Tubifera (Fig. 
1.7), with the side-walls still in- tact (i.e., T. . ferruginosa; Stephenson and Stempen, 1994). . In Dictydiaethalium  plumbeum. 
 the tops of sporangia are still discernable. .  but internal side-walls  do not separate each sporangium. .  and only the angles of the walls remain as  threads (Keller and Braun. 
 1999)  FIGURE 1.4 Lycogala epidendrum aethalia broken open exposing pseudocapllitium and light  colored spores covering piece of decayed wood. . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    7 FIGURE 1.5 Lycogala epidendrum aethalium closeup cut-away showing cortex warted sur- face and branching pseudocapillitial threads inside the spore chamber. . FIGURE 1.6 Tubifera ferruginosa pseudoaethalia top view showing closely packed individu- al sporangia with tops and side-walls intact. 
8     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The stalked sporangium is the fundamental morphological unit found in  most species of myxomycetes. . However   these fruiting body types transition  and intergrade into one another beginning with the sporangium that gradually  undergoes transformation from individual discrete sporangia into worm-like  plasmodiocarps. . Then   through different degrees of sporangial fusion. .  it forms a  pseudoaethalium where individual sporangia still retain their individual tops (in  species of Dictydiaethalium and Tubifera). 
 and finally. .  an aethalium may form. .   where the tops and side-walls become part of a much larger mound-shaped mass  where the sporangia lose their individual identity. . These fruiting bodies also in- tergrade from tiny. .  few-spored. 
 stalked sporangia that grow on the bark surface  of living trees and woody vines. .  to many thousands of sporangia producing  many more spores. .  to a compound single. 
 massive aethalium with thousands  of spores on ground sites of decaying forest litter. . These different fruiting body  strategies for spore formation and release represent different evolutionary strat- egies for the dissemination of the maximum number of spores. . A single pha- neroplasmodium may form thousands of stalked sporangia with fewer spores  per sporangium. 
In contrast, the plasmodiocarp and the aethalium form a single  fruiting body to release thousands of spores. . These fruiting body types occur  in the different myxomycete orders, ensuring maximum spore formation and  release. 
FIGURE 1.7 Tubifera ferruginosa pseudoaethalia closeup lateral view showing side-walls  and tops of intact individual sporangia. . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    9 MYXOMYCETE TERMINOLOGY Myxomycete fruiting bodies are more conspicuous in natural habitats where  they are collected for preservation in herbaria. . This life cycle stage is used for  the identification of species and is the basis for generic and species descriptions  in monographs and other publications. . A general review of the myxomycetes  has updated the biodiversity inventory information. 
 especially habitat descrip- tions and sampling (Spiegel et al.. .  2004)   and in the same book a chapter on  coprophilous fungi (Krug et al.. .  2004) has a limited section on myxomycete  morphological terminology. . Most technical terminology found in myxomy- cete publications is related to fruiting body occurrences and structural parts. .  Thus   a more comprehensive listing of defined morphological terms is included  here. .  and examples found in myxomycete publications are provided with page  numbers to facilitate location (Keller and Braun. 
 1999 = K & B; Martin and  Alexopoulos. .  1969 = M & A; Stephenson and Stempen. .  1994 = S & S). 
Life  cycle stages and reproductive and genetic terms are also included and defined  (Figs. . 1.8 and 1.9). 
Not every term found in literature sources is defined be- cause some seem too vague and of questionable usefulness. . Terms are arranged  alphabetically. 
FIGURE 1.8 Heterothallic life cycle for Physarum polycephalum. . 10     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Acuminate tips: Referring to the sharply pointed tips of capillitial elaters  in species of Trichia, such as T. . botrytis that has long, sharply tipped elaters  (M & A: 138, 498–499; S & S: Plate 14). . Allantoid spores: These spores are hotdog or sausage-shaped and are unique  in the myxomycetes (Keller et al., 1975). . Badhamia ovispora is the sole ex- ample. 
Anastomosing: Interconnecting branches, usually refers to the capillitium,  especially used for species in the genera Comatricha, Lamproderma (Fig. . 1.10)  and Stemonitis (Fig. . 1.11) (M & A: 191–240, 508–521; S & S: 28, 161). 
Amoeboflagellates: A general term that refers to the haploid myxamoebae  and haploid swarm cells (potential gametes) in the myxomycete life cycle. .  ca- pable of interchanging developmentally based on the presence or absence of  free water (Fig. . 1 8)  Angular: Having angles or sharp corners, frequently used to describe the  calcareous nodes in physaroid capillitium (Figs. 
1.12 and 1.13). . Angular cal- careous nodes are described in Physarum cinereum, P. . contextum, P. . leucopus,  and many other species of Physarum (M & A: 295, 307, 532–533, 536–537; S  & S: 143–144). . Aphanoplasmodium: A plasmodial type characterized in its early stages of  development by a network of flattened. 
 thread-like. .  transparent. .  almost invisible  strands that lack polarity and directional movement. . These early stages lack dis- tinct ectoplasmic and endoplasmic regions, and the streaming protoplasm is not  coarsely granular. . Free water favors early stages of development on agar cul- tures. 
Members of the Stemonitales and the genera Comatricha, Lamproderma,  and Stemonitis are examples of this group. . FIGURE 1.9 Apogamic life cycle for Didymium iridis. . Page left intentionally blank Page left intentionally blank FIGURE 1.10 Lamproderma ovoideoechinulatum stalked sporangium. 
(A) Peridium with re- flected bright iridescent colors. . (B) Central profile showing columella rising to midpoint with at- tached capillitial threads branching and anastomosing with free tips at the periphery. . FIGURE 1.11 Stemonitis smithii: (A) surface view of sporangium showing capillitial network as  a surface net with no free ends. . (B) Sporangium in optical section with central columella giving rise  to branching and anastomosing capillitium that unites at the surface as a surface net. . Page left intentionally blank Page left intentionally blank FIGURE 1.13 Craterium leucocephalum: (A) stalked sporangium with basal cup and white cal- careous mostly angular nodes. . (B) Centrally suspended calcareous pseudocollumella. . FIGURE 1.12 Physarum bruneolum: entire intact stalked sporangium (A) showing thickened  calcareous peridium and hypothallus at base of stalk. . (B) Image with cut-away interior showing  physaroid capillitium of angular calcareous nodes connected to hyaline noncalcareous threads. 
The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    13 Apogamy (adj: apogamous): The condition of a myxomycete having a non- sexual life cycle without ploidy variation and therefore no fusion of haploid  gametes (Fig. . 1 9)  Apomixis (adj: apomictic): A life cycle where meiosis and subsequent  fusion of gametes do not occur so that all stages are diploid (Fig. . 1 9)  Arcuate: Curved like a bow, in reference to fruiting body shape. . P  chryso- sperma often has arcuate, sessile, plasmodiocarps (M & A: 110–111, 492–493). 
Areolate: Having a pattern of block-like areas or polygons on the peridium,  as in Trichia floriformis dehiscence (M & A: 161, 498–499). . Assimilative (trophic) phase: These are the myxamoebae, swarm cells, and  plasmodia life cycle stages that are the feeding or nourishment phases (Fig. . 1 8)  Asperulate: Appearing rough because of small warts or spines, as in  Physarum polycephalum spore surface ornamentation (S & S: 148–149). . Attenuated: Gradually narrowed downward as the stalk of Hemitrichia cla- vata (M & A 148) and narrowed upward as the stalk of Clastoderma (K & B:  73–76; S & S: 95–96). . Axenic cultures: These cultures have only a single living species through- out the time-course of growth and development, with no other contaminating  organisms present. 
Badhamioid: A type of capillitium consisting of a network of calcareous  tubules found in species of Badhamia (Fig. . 1 14)  This character is extremely  FIGURE 1.14 Badhamia panicea showing badhamoid calcareous capillitial network. . 14     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology variable. 
 sometimes appearing physaroid. .  with a network of threads lacking  calcium carbonate in species that typically have a network of calcareous tubules  (K & B: 28; M & A: 324–325; S & S: 31). 
Bacteriovores: Any organism that feeds on bacteria as a source of food. .  Myxomycete myxamoebae and free-living plasmodia feed primarily on bacte- ria. 
 and also on yeasts. .  fungal spores. .  algae   and possibly as opportunists engulf- ing other microorganisms. .  thus acting as “microbial predators.” Bordered reticulate: A distinctive spore ornamentation with a raised episporic  network that appears to give the spore a border in optical section as seen with a com- pound microscope at 400–1000×. . The size and numbers of the meshwork as seen  in surface view are used in species descriptions and as key characters (Fig. 
1.15C);  Comatricha rispaudii, Hemitrichia serpula, and Perichaena reticulospora are a  just few examples (K & B: 31; M & A: 152–153, 502–503; S & S: 34). . Bright (light)-spored: Having spores that are bright (light or pallid) colors  in mass seen as hyaline, white, gray, yellow, orange, pink, and red. 
The or- ders Echinosteliales (Echinostelium and Clastoderma) and Trichiales with spe- cies in the genera Arcyria (Fig. . 1.16B–C), Hemitrichia (Fig. . 1.3), Metatrichia,  Perichaena, and Trichia are members of this light-spored group (K & B: 40,  169–170; M & A: 110–165, 492–503; S & S: 35). 
Bryophilous (musicolous) myxomycetes: Epiphytic species associated with  and fruiting on liverworts and mosses. . Licea bryophila and L. . hepatica ex- clusively sporulate on liverworts, and L. . gleoderma exclusively sporulates on  mosses on the bark of living trees (Ing, 1994). . Bulbous: Referring to the bulb-like swollen tips of the elaters in some spe- cies of Trichia, for example, T. . lutescens (M & A: 162). 
Caespitose: Growing in clusters or dense tufts. . Comatricha caespitosa  takes its specific epithet from the dense tufts or clusters of stalked sporangia  (M & A: 226–227, 512–513). . Most Stemonitis species are caespitose, for ex- ample, S. . axifera, S. 
fusca, and S. . splendens among others (K & B: 171; M & A:   191–199, 508–511; S & S: 153, 154 Plate12). 
Calcareous bodies (lime knots): Granular calcium carbonate. .  CaCO3   in  the Physaraceae is found in the capillitium as calcareous nodes. 
 deposited as  a covering on the peridium in varying thickness and layers. .  in the stalk and  extending into the columella in the spore chamber. . In the genus Physarum,  expansions in the capillitial threads contain granular calcium carbonate (lime  FIGURE 1.15 Spore ornamentation types: (A) spiny; (B) warted; (C) reticulate; and (D) smooth. . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    15 knots) interconnected by noncalcareous threads (Fig. . 1 12)  Use of the word  “lime” (calcium oxide, CaO) in myxomycete literature is incorrect when it is  substituted for calcium carbonate. 
Examples include many species of Physarum  (K & B: 28). . Calyculus: A cup, referring to the persistent peridium forming a cup at the  base of a sporangium. . Most species in the genera Arcyria (Fig. 
1.16C) and  Cribraria have a calyculus. . The depth and surface markings on the cup can be  found in species descriptions (M & A: 91, 488–489; S & S: Plate 2, E–H). 
Capillitium: A system of sterile threads usually attached to the columella. .   either simple or branching and anastomosing. .  to form a network intermingled  with the spores inside the fruiting body (most species of myxomycetes). 
This  definition refers to a “true” capillitium that occurs in the orders Echinostelia- les (Fig. . 1.1), Trichiales (Fig. . 1.3), Physarales (Fig. . 1.14), and Stemonitales  (Fig. 
1 11)  These threads form from a system of preformed vacuoles that co- alesce, giving rise to solid or hollow threads often with debris and of uniform  diameter usually less than 6.0 µm. . Threads in Arcryia species are more or less  elastic and expand at maturity (Fig. . 1 16C)  FIGURE 1.16 Fruiting body development of Arcyria ferruginea: (A) immature stalked sporangia  in early stages of formation before final mature shape. . (B) Sporangia freshly mature still in moist- ened state showing basal calyculus. . (C) Gregarious mature orange sporangia with powdery light- colored spore mass and expanded elastic capillitial threads. . 16     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Centrioles (basal bodies): Cylindrical cell organelle of eukaryotes found in  pairs in cytoplasm near the nucleus of flagellated cells (swarm cells) composed  of the 9 + 2 arrangement of microtubules. . Cartilaginous: Consisting of a rather uniformly thickened peridial layer in  some species of Diderma, especially D. 
floriforme and D. . trevelyani, which  have multiple calcareous layers. . Peridial layers may be described as single. .   double   or triple and are often difficult to interpret accurately because of tight  adhesion (M & A: 357–358. 
 371–372   548–549   552–553; S & S: 112–113. .   Plate 13A). 
Cinereous: Resembling the color of ashes, bluish gray, represented by the  fruiting bodies of Physarum cinereum, a common species frequently occurring  on living St. . Augustine lawn grass (K & B: 127, 174; M & A: 291–292, 532– 533; S & S: 143–144). 
Circumscissile: Refers to a dehiscence pattern where a special thin-walled  area forms an encircling line usually around the apex of the sporangium. . The  best examples are Perichaena corticalis (M & A: 111–112, 492–493; S & S:  Plate 15A) and Metatrichia vesparium (K & B: 169; M & A: 143–144, 502– 503; S & S: 137–138). . Clavate: Club-shaped. . Wider and thicker at the apex and narrower at the  base. . Generally applied to the shape of the sporangium as in the club or turbi- nate shape of H. 
clavata (M & A: 148, 502–503). . Clustered spores (spore balls): Spores adhering together in loose or tight  clusters of 2–40, characteristic of some Badhamia species, including B. 
bis- pora, B. . capsulifera, B. . crassipella, B. . nitens, B  papaveracea, B. . populina, B. .  utricularis, and B. 
versicolor. . This character also occurs scattered in other taxa,  for example, Dianema corticatum, Didymium synsporon, Macbrideola synspo- ros, Minakatella longifila, Perichaena syncarpon, and Trichia synsporon. . An  interior cavity may be present or absent in spore clusters. . The spore shape may  be nearly spherical in loose clusters but distinctly ovate or pyriform in tight  clusters. . Spore clusters provide a diagnostic character useful in separating spe- cies in keys and species descriptions. .  for example. 
 free spores versus clustered  spores (K & B: 28; M & A: 251–261. .  522–525; S & S: 34). 
Coenocyte (syncytium): From multiple fusions and referring to the myxo- mycete plasmodium. .  a large amorphous mass of protoplasm not separated  into individual cells. .  containing many nuclei and surrounded by a membrane  (Figs. . 1.2 and 1.8). 
Cogs: Square-ended projections similar to cogs on a wheel, often accom- panied by rings, half-rings, plates, reticulations, and minute spines. . Capillitial  threads of Arcyria species usually have ornamentation that includes cogs as part  of the surface markings (M & A: 123–137, 494–497). . Coiled: A structure twisted around on itself, as in the capillitial threads  of Metatrichia vesparium (M & A: 143–144, 502–503; S & S: 137–138,   Plate 15). . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    17 Columella: A dome-shaped. 
 spherical. .  or elongated central sterile structure  within the sporangium that represents an extension of the stalk into the spore  chamber (Figs. 
1.10 and 1.11). . It may be of various sizes and may serve as a  supporting structure for the capillitium that may be attached in part or through- out its length. . It may be a short protrusion or extend to the top of the sporan- gium. 
The columella, when present, is an important part of the species descrip- tion, and is used in keys to identify the different species. . This structure is absent  in species of the Liceales and Trichiales. 
Compressed: Flattened laterally as in the stalked sporangia of Physarum  compressum that are compressed into a fan shape (M & A: 293, 532–533). . Conical: Cone-shaped, with a broad circular base and tapering to a point at  the top. . Lycogala conicum can be sight identified in the field because of its large  conical fruiting body hence the specific epithet (M & A: 63–64, 482–483). 
Coprophilous (fimicolous) myxomycetes: Species that grow and sporulate on  mostly mammalian dung of herbivorous animals. . A few species are obligate and  are only known from dung, for example, Kelleromyxa fimicola, Licea alexopou- li, and Trichia brunnea. . These three species have evenly and greatly thickened  spore walls without a thin-walled area or germination pore and appear to have  adapted to passage through the intestinal tract of grazing herbivores (Eliasson  and Keller. .  1999; Krug et al.. 
 2004)  Cortex: Thickened calcareous outer covering of the aethalium in the genus  Fuligo (M & A: 266–267, 526–527; S & S: 123–124). . This structure appears in  all Fuligo species descriptions instead of the term peridium because it generally  functions in the same way, protecting the black spore mass inside. . Fuligo septica  is a conspicuous example because of its large size (Keller et al., 2016) and well- developed cortex of calcareous granules. . Mucilago crustaea also has a thick- ened cortex, but in this case, it is composed of crystalline not granular calcium  carbonate. 
It is a look-alike species sometimes misidentified as F. . septica since  both are common species found in similar habitats. . Corticolous myxomycetes: This group of myxomycetes develops, grows,  and sporulates on the bark surface of living trees and woody vines (Everhart  et al., 2008, 2009; Snell and Keller, 2003). 
Most species have microscopic plasmo- dia (protoplasmodium or a reduced aphanoplasmodium) that exhibit rapid sporu- lation, usually in less than 24 h. . These plasmodia produce single, tiny (less than  1 mm), stalked sporangia with an evanescent peridium and quick spore release. 
 Life cycle stages. .  such as spores. .  microcysts. .  and sclerotia. 
 are resting dormant  stages capable of surviving unfavorable environmental conditions and reviving  quickly when favorable conditions return. .  much like desert ephemeral plants. .  Most Echinostelium and Macbrideola species have tiny stalked sporangia that are  the best examples of this short-lived life cycle strategy (Keller and Everhart, 2010). . Crowded: Refers to the species habit where fruiting bodies are massed or  tightly packed together. 
Examples include several from the Trichiales: Oligo- nema schweinitzii. .  Calonema aureum (K & B: 163F). .  Metatrichia vesparium. .   18     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Trichia favoginea. .  and many Arcyria species. .  including A. 
denudata, A. . nutans,  and A. 
versicolor (M & A: 119–121, 126–127, 133–134, 136–137, 143–144,  160–161, 492–497; S & S: 137, 156–157, Plate 14A, Plate 15B). . Crystalline calcareous bodies: Loose crystals or scales scattered on the sur- face of the peridium (Fig. . 1.16), or compacted to form a smooth eggshell-like  outer crust, as in the genus Didymium. . Two different groups of species are rec- ognized: one based on the type of crystals such as the stellate or star-shaped  crystals found on the peridium of D. 
iridis (Fig. . 1.17) (S & S: 117–118) and  D. . squamulosum. 
The other group has an eggshell-like outer crust of compacted  crystals that gives an outward appearance of Diderma species as in Didymium  difforme and D. . quitense  Members of the latter group are sometimes misiden- tified as Diderma species when there is failure to examine fractured peridial  surfaces for protruding tips of crystals. . A unique rhombohedral crystal was de- scribed from the stalk of Diachea arboricola using scanning electron micros- copy (SEM) images (Keller et al., 2004). 
Cylindrical: A structure that has the same diameter throughout its elongate  length. . Usually applied to the general shape of a sporangium, as in Diachea  leucopodia (M & A: 178–179, 506–507; S & S: 107–108, Plate 4). . Dark-spored: Having spores in mass that are black or dark brown, such as  the Physarales and Stemonitales (known as the dark-spored orders) (Figs. 
1.10  and 1.18). . Dehiscent: Peridium splitting open at maturity along thinner lines like the  petals of a flower as in Diderma floriforme, or like a star, as in D. . asteroides,  D. . radiatum, or D. . trevelyani. 
Dextral: A term sometimes used to describe the winding in a right-handed  direction of the spiral bands around the capillitial threads in Hemitrichia and  Trichia species. . FIGURE 1.17 Stellate crystals covering peridial surface typical of Didymium iridis sporangia. . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    19 Dichotomous: Refers to the branching pattern of the capillitium forking into  two more or less equal parts as in Lamproderma muscorum and Macbrideola  cornea. . Dictydine (plasmodic) granules: Microscopic (0.5–3.0 µm). 
 usually dark- colored. .  strongly refractive spherical granules that are found only on fruit- ing bodies in the genera Cribraria. .  Dictydium. .  and Lindbladia. 
In species of  Cribraria the dictydine granules are prominent on the peridial network and the  calyculus (cup) when present. . In Lindbladia these granules were characterized  using SEM and X-ray microanalysis and shown to be hollow and contain cal- cium (Hatano et al., 1996). . Earlier researchers (the Listers) assumed that the  dark granules in the plasmodium were the source of the same granules on the  fruiting bodies; hence they introduced the term plasmodic granules. . However    since there has never been a developmental study to determine the origin and  final deposition of these structures. .  dictydine granules is the preferred usage  until more data from developmental studies are available. 
For a more detailed  historical review of these terms, see Hatano et al. . (1996)  Duplex: Refers to two types of capillitium as in Leocarpus fragilis (K & B:  173. .  Plate 13; S & S: 130). 
 with a network of calcareous tubules connected to  or distinct from a mostly noncalcareous system of capillitial threads. .  and as in  Willkommlangea reticulata [M & A: 243–244. .  522–523 (as Cienkowskia); S & S:   FIGURE 1.18 Lamproderma retirugisporum stalked sporangia showing bluish iridescent pe- ridia with black spores scattered on surface. . 20     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Plate 9B]. 
 with a capillitium of angular. .  flattened. 
 calcareous nodes massed  transversely as plates and slender. .  delicate   anastomosing threads forming a  loose or dense net. 
 mostly noncalcareous. .  or with a few calcareous nodes and  numerous short. .  sharp-pointed branchlets. 
Effused: A term applied to the habit of the fruiting body when thinly spread  out and flattened on the surface of the substratum. . The effused condition is  found frequently in different species. 
 but one special example is the broadly ef- fused white fruiting bodies of Diderma effusum (M & A: 356–357. .  546–547; S  & S: 111) growing on decayed leaves. 
Elaters: Free, usually unbranched and unattached, capillitial threads marked  with spiral bands characteristic of species in the genus Trichia. . These elastic  threads are hygroscopic and undergo twitching movements that serve to dis- perse the spores in response to humidity changes in the surrounding environ- ment (K & B: 29. 
 169; M & A: 160–161. .  498–501; S & S: 155–159). 
Endosporous: Having spores borne enclosed within a peridium (Fig. . 1.10),  such as in the orders Echinosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales, Physarales, Ste- monitales. . The order Ceratiomyxales has spores borne externally but this  group is no longer included in the myxomycetes based on recent molecular  evidence. 
Epihypothallic development: A developmental type where stalked sporangia  develop from the aphanoplasmodium through a series of individual primordial  changes as the protoplasm condenses and concentrates into separate blebs that  represent the sporangial initials destined to form the individual sporangia. . The  hypothallus forms on the lower side of the presporulating plasmodium and di- rectly on the surface of the substratum. . The stalk material is deposited at equi- distant points on top of the hypothallus and elongates as more material (secreted  internally from within the protoplasmic mass) is added to the tip of the stalk. 
  carrying the prespore mass upward (Keller. .  1982)  This can be seen in time- lapse photography as the stalk forms first as a black line and the prespore mass  appears to climb the stalk in dramatic fashion, and eventually forming the dark  spore mass. 
This developmental type is characteristic of the Stemonitales as  seen in several Comatricha, Lamproderma, and Stemonitis species. . Evanescent: Refers to a peridium that often disappears early in develop- ment in certain species of Arcyria, Comatrichia, Macbrideola, and Stemonitis  (Fig. . 1 11)  Extranuclear mitotic (open) division: Refers to mitotic nuclear division in  myxamoebae wherein an extranuclear spindle forms and the nuclear membrane  disappears during division. 
Floricolous myxomycetes: An assemblage of species associated with the in- florescences of large neotropical living herbs. .  such as Heliconia and Costus. 
  where rapidly decaying floral parts are enclosed by living bracts (Schnittler and  Stephenson. .  2002)  Foliicolous myxomycetes: Species restricted to growing and sporulating on  decaying leaves on ground sites. . The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    21 Fruiting body: A general term for the spore-bearing structure. 
 also known  as sporophore. .  sporocyst. .  spore case. .  sporotheca. 
 or fructifications (Clark and  Haskins. .  2014)  Fugacious: Having a peridium that disappears soon after development. .  as in  species of Cribraria. .  where portions are gone at maturity. 
 resulting in a peridial  network in the upper half of the spore case above the calyculus. . Interstices of  the peridial network are probably extremely thin and the membrane ephemeral  because there is no evidence of its presence with scanning electron microscope  observation. 
Fungicolous myxomycetes: Species that feed and grow on fungi. . Physarum  polycephalum is a good example of a bright yellow phaneroplasmodium that  feeds on and covers Pleurotus ostreatus (the oyster mushroom) and Lentinus  tigrinum on decaying stumps. 
 bark   logs   and the base of standing dead trees  on ground sites (Keller et al.. .  2008)  Badhamia utricularis also occurs on a  wide variety of wood-rotting fungi. .  including Stereum hirsutum and Phlebia  radiata. .  as a chrome-yellow plasmodium on decaying logs and forms extensive  colonies of weakly stalked sporangia (Ing. .  1994)  These myxomycetes occur so  frequently in this association with fungi it cannot be ascribed to chance. 
Gregarious: A term used to describe the general habit when fruiting bodies  grow in closely associated groups but not touching (as in crowded or heaped  habits) or solitary. . These terms are used in species descriptions to describe how  fruiting bodies are spaced in a given habitat (Fig. 
1 16A–C)  Helical (spiral) bands: These are thickened, raised bands that occur on the  capillitial threads of Hemitrichia and Metatrichia species and on the elaters  of Trichia species. . This structural feature encircles the thread in a spiral pat- tern and is sometimes smooth, but often has an ornamentation of spines and  warts. 
Helical may be a more appropriate term than spiral since helical refers  to a three-dimensional structural arrangement around a cylinder. .  whereas spiral  refers to a three-dimensional arrangement around a cone. . The helical bands  can be counted, and this is an important key character in the identification of  Trichia varia, which has two or three bands, whereas most species have three  to six bands. 
Herbicolous myxomycetes: Species associated with a microhabitat of her- baceous, perennial, grassland plants with long floral stalks and dried fruits of  capsules and composite heads. . These myxomycetes apparently have adapted to  higher summertime and colder wintertime temperatures and to drier and more  alkaline conditions (Kilgore et al., 2009). 
Hypothallus: A structure deposited by the plasmodium on the surface of  the substratum, cementing the fruiting body in situ at the base. . This structure is  extremely variable and may be lacking; membranous and transparent; or tough,  spongy, and conspicuous as in Tubifera ferruginosa (S & S:159, Plate 2A, 2B)  and T. . microsperma. 
Heterokaryon: A multinucleate cell with genetically different nuclei, for ex- ample, Didymium iridis plasmodia. . 22     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Heterothallic: Describes a sexual reproductive system with mating types  controlling amoeboflagellate fusion to produce a diploid plasmodium. . This re- quires two genetically compatible sexual gametes controlled by a one-locus,  multiple allelic mating system. . These sexual systems are found in Physarum  polycephalum, Didymium iridis, and P. . pusillum (Fig. 
1 8)  Nonheterothallic (homothallism): Describes a reproductive system where  the sexual fusion of two amoebae carrying different mating types does not oc- cur. .  and is replaced by either apogamy or homothallism. . In apogamy (which  can also be called apomixes = no meiosis) meiosis is partially blocked (auto- mixis) and the resulting spore remains diploid and can thus produce diploid  plasmodia without the need to mate with another amoeba (Fig. . 1 9)  In homo- thallism. 
 which has not been confirmed in the myxomycetes. .  a sexual cycle with  haploid amoebal fusion to produce a diploid plasmodium would occur between  any two amoebae since there would be no mating types involved. . Many species  of myxomycetes have both heterothallic and nonheterothallic species, but sev- eral species are only nonheterothallic as in Didymium difforme and D. 
saturnus  (Clark and Haskins, 2010). . Iridescence: Peridia of some fruiting bodies have brilliant combinations of me- tallic bronze. .  shining silver. .  and glittering gold. .  and beautiful bluish iridescent sur- faces reminiscent of spectral rainbow colors. 
 justifying the special phrase “biolog- ical jewels of nature.” Diachea species are all iridescent. .  and most Lamproderma  species are primarily bluish iridescent (Fig. 
1 18)  A species new to science, D. .  arboricola, has a spectacular array of iridescent colors and is only known from the  bark of living trees in the upper tree canopy (Keller et al., 2004). . Intercalary swellings: It is difficult to know what the difference is between  this term and vesicles. 
 but in this case. .  they occur along the middle of the capil- litial threads and the swellings are much smaller. . Two species that consistently  display this character, which aids in their identification include Minakatella  longifila and Perichaena minor (Keller et al., 1973). 
Intranuclear mitotic (closed) division: Nuclear division in the plasmodium  does not involve centrioles and the nuclear membrane remains intact so spindle  microtubules are confined within the nucleus. . Karyogamy: Fusion of two compatible nuclei. 
Lignicolous myxomycetes: Those plasmodia that grow on or in decaying  wood and form fruiting bodies on decaying tree logs. .  stumps   woody branches. .   and woody fragments on ground sites and standing dead trees. . Species of Lyco- gala are good examples, especially L. . epidendrum (Fig. 
1 4)  Meiosis: A type of nuclear division in sexually reproducing organisms where  chromosomes replicate once and divide twice. .  resulting in four chromosomal  sets. .  each containing half the original chromosome number. . Paired with cytoki- nesis, this typically results in the production of gametes (Fig. 
1 8)  Microcyst: A round, tiny (4–7 µm in diameter), thin-walled, smooth, uni- nucleate structure that serves as a dormant resting stage in the life cycle of the  myxomycetes. . Forms when a myxamoeba encysts (Fig. . 1 8)  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    23 Mitosis: Process of chromosomal replication and division and cytokinesis to  produce two daughter nuclei genetically identical to the parent nuclei. . Typically  involves a series of stages consisting of prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and  telophase (Fig. 
1 8)  Myxamoeba: A nonflagellated, amoeboid, usually haploid cell that ultimate- ly may function as a gamete in sexual life cycles (Fig. . 1 8)  The term “amoebo- flagellate” is often used to encompass both this stage and the flagellated (swarm  cell) stage in the life cycle. . Nivicolous (snowbank) myxomycetes: These myxomycetes occur in moun- tainous terrain at the snowline or underneath and along the margins of melting  snowbanks. 
Fruiting occurs during spring on forest litter and rocks or sometimes  on stems of living shrubs or trunks of trees. . This is a distinct ecological group  with species in the genera Lamproderma (Figs. . 1.10 and 1.18), Lepidoderma  (Fig. . 1.19), Comatricha, and Diderma that are the most frequently collected. 
Nodes: This is a general term used for a structure that serves as a common  junction for connecting threads. . In Cribraria the thickened nodes serve as the  junction of several connecting threads that form the peridial network in the up- per part of the sporangial wall. . Sometimes used in the species descriptions of  the genus Physarum for the calcareous connections of hyaline capillitial threads  FIGURE 1.19 Lepidoderma granuliferum sessile plasmodiocarps showing peridium covered  with crystalline scales. . 24     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology (Fig. 
1 12)  Note that in Cribraria the node is part of the peridium, whereas the  node in Physarum is part of the capillitial system. . Operculum: A lid-like structure found in some species of Licea where its  apical position on a sporangium aids in the exposure and release of the spores. .  Some of the more common species that have an operculum are L. 
kleistobolus  (M & A: 44–45, 480–481; S & S: 133B, 134), L. . operculata (M & A: 480–481;  S & S:133D, 135), and L. . parasitica (M & A: 46–47, 480–481). 
The opercula  are circular by way of a preformed thinner line of dehiscence that facilitates the  lid popping open as the entire sporangium dries out at maturity. . Peridium: An acellular structural wall of varying thickness that encloses  the spores in the endosporous myxomycetes (Fig. . 1 18)  At maturity, the  peridium may be persistent as in Perichaena and either single-layered as in  P. 
microspora, double as in P. . depressa, or triple as in Physarum bogoriense. .  It may also be membranous and evanescent as in species of Macbrideola or  Stemonitis. 
Phagocytosis: The act of a plasmodium or myxamoeba feeding by a process  of engulfment and ingestion of organic matter, mostly bacteria. . Phaneroplasmodium: This is the largest, most conspicuous, and color- ful plasmodial type frequently seen in the field. . It typically gives rise to many  fruiting bodies that may cover an extensive area. 
At maturity, this plasmodium  exhibits polarity and directional movement, terminating anteriorly in an ad- vancing fan-shaped feeding edge, and posteriorly in a trailing network of veins. .  The veins deposit excreted matter along their margins, frequently appearing as  “plasmodial tracks” on the substratum especially leaves. . The entire plasmodium  has a raised, three-dimensional aspect with definite margins. 
This type of plas- modium grows best under drier conditions where free water is absent. . Mem- bers of the order Physarales are the best examples of this type of plasmodium  (Figs. . 1.2, 1.8, and 1.9). 
Physaroid: A term applied to the capillitial system in species of Physarum. .  A network of slender, noncalcareous threads interconnected by enlarged calcar- eous nodes of various shapes (Fig. 
1 12)  Pinocytosis: Type of plasmodial feeding whereby Physarum polycephalum  engulfs liquid droplets from the surrounding medium. . Pitted (perforated): This term is applied here to the capillitial threads (tu- bules) of Perichaena species. . SEM images clearly show capillitial surfaces  with reticulations and pits, the latter as holes of various sizes. 
The first SEM  images of a myxomycete new to science highlight the pits in P. . reticulospora  (Keller and Reynolds, 1971, Fig. 
5)  Additional SEM images of pitted cap- illitial threads were documented for P. . quadrata (Keller and Eliasson, 1992,  Figs. . 24–28) and P. 
calongei showing a conspicuous pitted reticulum (Lado  et al., 2009, Figs. . 19–21)  Plasmogamy: Fusion of protoplasts of two cells preceding nuclear fusion. . Protoplasmodium: Smallest of the plasmodial types that remains microscop- ic throughout its existence. . The highly granular and homogeneous protoplasm  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    25 has a plate-like shape that fails to develop vein-like reticulate strands and ad- vancing fans typical of other plasmodial types. . Each plasmodium gives rise to a  single, tiny sporangium, as in species of Echinostelium. . Pseudocapillitium: A capillitium assumed to develop differently than a true  capillitium, though there is little evidence to support this notion. 
Occurring as  thread-like, membrane-like, or perforated structures intermingled with the spore  mass in Reticularia species. . Appears as a system of irregular tubes in aethalia  of Lycogala species, such as L. . epidendrum (M & A: 63, 482–483; S & S: 136),  where margins are wrinkled and much wider than 6 µm in diameter (Figs. . 1.4  and 1.5). 
Pseudocolumella: A calcareous mass freely suspended in the center of the  sporangium. .  resembling a true columella but disconnected from the tip and the  base of the columella or to the internal surface of the peridium. 
Three examples  are Craterium leucocephalum (Fig. . 1.13), Physarella oblonga, and Physarum  stellatum (M & A: 330–331, 542–543). 
Pulvinate: Cushion or mound-shaped. . Used in connection with the aetha- lium of Fuligo septica (M & A: 526–527; S & S: Plate 2D). . Reniform: Kidney-shaped. . Referring to sporangia, as in Physarum compressum. 
Reversible protoplasmic streaming: This term is also referred to as cyto- plasmic streaming, rhythmic streaming, or shuttle streaming. . Movement is di- rectional first toward the anterior feeding edge, then slows and pauses, and then  reverses direction, flowing toward the posterior end. . In time-lapse photography  this results in pulsating movements in the plasmodia and also in the developing  sporangia. . This streaming occurs in both the aphanoplasmodium and phanero- plasmodium type, but the latter best example is the yellow plasmodium of P. .  polycephalum that is used in most teaching laboratories (Fig. . 1 2)  Rugose: Wrinkled, as in the peridial surface of Diderma rugosum, which is  reticulately wrinkled, marking the lines of dehiscence into polyhedral segments. . Sclerotium: A dormant resting structure in the myxomycete life cycle formed  from the plasmodium under unfavorable conditions. 
 such as lower temperatures. .   decreased moisture. .  depleted nutrients. .  and aging factors (Figs. . 1.8 and 1.9). 
Sessile: Without stalks; in many species of myxomycetes (Figs. . 1.3, 1.14,  and 1.19). . Shapes of fruiting bodies: Discoid (disc- or plate-shaped); fusiform (spin- dle-shaped. .  wider in the middle and tapering at both ends); globose (spheri- cal or baseball-shaped); subglobose (nearly globose); infundibuliform (funnel- shaped); lenticular (having the shape of a double convex lens); obovate (ovate  but tapering to base); obpyriform (pear-shaped. .  broader above and tapering to  base); ovate (egg-shaped. .  wider at base and tapering toward apex); pyriform  (pear-shaped); turbinate (top-shaped or the shape of an inverted cone); umbil- icate (having a small depression. .  usually on the underside of the spore case  above the stalk). . Sinistral: With spiral bands winding in a left-handed direction, opposite of  dextral. 
26     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Spherules (macrocysts): Multinucleate. .  walled   plasmodial segments of var- ious sizes that form through encystment of the plasmodium into a sclerotium. .  These spherules regenerate the plasmodial stage once favorable environmental  conditions return (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). 
These structures have also  been denoted as macrocysts, but this may create confusion since the same term  is used in the life cycle stage of cellular slime molds (Figs. . 1 8, 1 9)  Spores: Microscopic walled haploid reproductive units formed inside the  fruiting body. . Spore color, shape, size, and ornamentation are important char- acteristics used in species descriptions. . Spores usually are spherical in shape  and free as single units or aggregated into loose or tight clusters. . Size ranges  from 5 to 22 µm in diameter, and surfaces may be spiny, warty, or reticulate  (partially, evenly, or banded), smooth or variations of these basic markings   (Fig. 
1 15A–D)  Spore mass: A group of spores. . The color of spores en masse is a common  descriptive phrase used to determine the dark (black or brown, Fig. . 1.12) versus  light (red, yellow, or white spore, Fig. . 1.16) character. 
This can be determined  either by opening the mature sporangium and noting the color of spores col- lectively or observing the color of the spore dust on the bottom of a collecting  box. . Specimens should be in a fresh state because color changes can occur, es- pecially fading, when sporangia are exposed to the weather elements for longer  periods of time. 
Sporulation: The series of developmental stages from plasmodium to ma- ture fruiting body with spores (Fig. . 1 16A–C)  Stalk: A structure that elevates the spore case with spores above the sub- stratum. . Sometimes referred to as a stipe (adj: stipitate) in species descriptions. .  Stalks may be broader at the base and tapered upward and described as subulate  or furrowed with grooves, as in D. 
rugosum  Subhypothallic development: A type of development seen in species that  develop from phaneroplasmodia (e.g.. .  the order Physarales) wherein the proto- plasm becomes concentrated into hemispherical mounds with the hypothallus  forming on the surface of the plasmodium from the outer slime sheath. . The  fluid protoplasm migrates from underneath the hypothallus, pushing upward  so that each mound eventually elongates into a columnar structure (the future  stalk). . Development proceeds so that the hypothallus, stalk, and sporangial wall  form from, and are continuous with, the upper external surface of the plasmodi- um. . Time-lapse photography shows the pulsating protoplasm actually blowing  through the stalk much like air in a balloon and the early immature sporangial  stages still pulsating as more protoplasmic material enters through the stalk. 
  eventually forming the spore-forming apex. . The granular debris in the plasmo- dium sometimes includes fungal spores, green algae, and other particulate mat- ter that ends up forming the central core of the stalk. 
Species in the genera Phy- sarum and Didymium are examples of this type of development (Keller, 1982). . Succulenticolous myxomycetes: A group of species that occur in deserts and  xeric habitats primarily on species of Opuntia and other cacti (Lado et al., 1999). .  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    27 These myxomycetes grow and fruit on rotting cladodia (cactus pads) and dried  stems of cacti and arborescent giant succulents (Agave and Carnegia) in south- western USA and similar regions of the world. . Surface net: In Stemonitis species, the system of branching and anastomos- ing capillitial threads which arise from the columella and eventually fuse at the  surface into a complete net (Fig. 
1.11) (M & A: 191–202, 508–510; S & S: 83). . Sutures or plates: Structures involved in a special mode of dehiscence  that results in splitting open along preformed definite lines of demarcation in  mature sporangia, releasing spores. . Found especially in certain species in the  genus Licea, for example, L. . minima (M & A: 45, 480–481; S & S: 133C) and  L. 
pusilla  Swarm cell: A comma-shaped, usually biflagellate, uninucleate, haploid cell  capable of functioning as a sexual gamete. . This structure has a corkscrew swim- ming motion that distinguishes it from other aquatic microorganisms (Fig. . 1 8)   As already noted, the term “amoeboflagellate” is often used to encompass both  this stage and the nonflagellated (myxamoeba) stage in the life cycle. . Synchronous nuclear division: Simultaneous or synchronous nuclear divi- sion occurs in the phaneroplasmodium of Physarum polycephalum and P. 
gyro- sum  This has been shown in a series of real time movie film images produced  by James Koevenig at the University of Iowa (Koevenig, 1961). . Syngamy: Fusion of sexual gametes (myamoebae and swarm cells) (Fig. . 1 8)  Trabecula: An unbranched calcareous column or pillar attached above and  below, bridging the vertical space in the fruiting body as in Badhamiopsis ai- noae (Keller and Brooks, 1976, p. . 836, Figs  1–4) and Didymium sturgisii (M  & A: 398, 558–559). . Trophic stages: Life cycle stages relating to nutrition or feeding activity  (myxamoeba and plasmodium). 
Tubular (hollow) versus solid: This refers to the capillitial threads generally  in Trichiales taxa. . Minakatella longifila has tubular threads (once thought to be  solid). .  which resulted in reclassification of this species from the Dianemataceae  (solid threads) to Trichiaceae (hollow or tubular threads; Keller et al.. .  1973)  Vesicles: This is a general term that refers to enlargements, usually in the  capillitial threads. 
Two of the more noteworthy examples are Didymium serpula  (M & A: 396. .  558–559)   which has large yellow vesicular bodies. .  and Brefel- dia maxima. 
 which has nodes bearing multicellular vesicles (M & A: 170–171. .   504–505; S & S: 85). 
Warted (verrucose): Having small rounded protuberances, usually referring  to surface spore ornamentation (Fig. . 1 15B)  Waxy (oil droplets): This term is applied to the apparent waxy or oily inclu- sions in the two species of Elaeomyxa: E. 
cerifera and E. . miyazakiensis. 
These  species have oil or wax in the stalk, the columella, peridium, or the capillitium  as granules, globules, or inclusions. . This long-standing interpretation of waxy or  oily inclusions is based on direct microscopic observation, but convincing evi- dence from chemical tests is lacking (M & A: 175–176, 504–505). . 28     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology MYXOMYCETE LIFE CYCLE STAGES The biology of the myxomycetes narrative follows the stages in the life cycle  beginning with the spore (Clark and Haskins. 
 2010   2013   2016; Everhart and  Keller. .  2008; Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968)  The spore germinates giving rise to  either a myxamoeba or a swarm cell that may form a microcyst under adverse  conditions. 
 or given optimal conditions. .  may fuse with genetically compatible  types. .  eventually developing into a plasmodium. . The plasmodium is the stage  that develops into the fruiting bodies where spores are formed. . Each of these  stages is described in detail. 
The spore—The typical myxomycete spore is spherical in shape and can  be as small as 4 µm in diameter (as in Stemonitis smithii) or as large as 22 µm  (as in Fuligo megaspora). . Most of the species have spores in the size range of  7–12 µm. . Spore size, surface ornamentation, shape, and color are important  characters used in all species descriptions and identification keys. . For proper  identification, sporangia should be in a mature state with a powdery spore mass  to avoid premature drying that may result in aberrant spore development. . It is  tempting to collect premature, brightly colored fruiting bodies in the latter stag- es of sporulation (Fig. . 1.16A), but this may, and often does, result in specimens  that are hardened, aberrant, and have agglutinated spores that cannot be identi- fied. . Furthermore. 
 even specimens that appear to be normally mature sometimes  have “giant spores” present in microscopic mounts that lack ornamentation and  should not be measured in making spore counts. .  used to determine size. .  or used  as a descriptive character for ornamentation. 
Great care must be taken in selecting a field specimen in good condition  and to avoid badly weathered, moldy, or insect-damaged specimens. . Internal  structures are sometimes obscured by a spore-filled sporangium. .  and therefore  spores should be removed without damaging the branching patterns and attach- ments of capillitial threads when present. . This is especially true of many species  in the Physarales and Stemonitales. 
This can be done in the field by carefully  preselecting wind-blown sporangia or by gently blowing away spores free of  the spore case. . This also can be facilitated by firmly grasping the sporangium  with needle-nose forceps and gently blowing on the sporangium to remove most  of the spores. . Another equally effective method is to create an air stream by  blowing through a flexible rubber tubing with a glass pipette which has a very  small terminal opening. 
Sometimes it may take more effort by placing broken  sporangia in a water-filled test tube and vigorously shaking. . Additional proce- dures for handling and preparing specimens for study and instructions for mak- ing homemade dissecting tools are available in Sundberg and Keller (1996) and  Keller and Braun (1999). 
How high do myxomycete spores fly? Dry spore dispersal is mainly by  wind currents over long distances. . Evidence from high altitude atmospheric  sites, such as airplanes or mountaintops, is lacking. . Most airborne sample sites  are at or near ground level up to 25 m (Brown et al., 1964). 
One study at the  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    29 University of Texas at Austin obtained rooftop samples using a Rotorod and  isolation on agar culture medium. . More than 16 different species of myxomy- cetes, all belonging to the Physarales, were grown to maturity; however, none  were identified to species. 
Tesmer and Schnittler (2007) measured the sedimen- tation velocity of myxomycete spores based on experimental protocols that fol- lowed Stokes’ Law for the terminal velocity of small spherical bodies in air. .   These aerodynamic experiments were performed under controlled laboratory  conditions using airtight and earthed glass cylinders that determined the termi- nal velocity of myxomycete spores represented by seven different species with  spore sizes from 5 to 15 µm in diameter. . Sedimentation velocities depended on  size. 
Their Table 1 clearly shows that Stemonitis smithii and S. . fusca have the  smallest spore diameters and the lowest sedimentation velocity, and therefore  potentially longer dispersal distances over time, whereas Lamproderma atros- porum and L. . sauteri have the largest spore diameters and the highest sedimen- tation velocity, and therefore shorter dispersal distances over time. . The authors  make the case that species of myxomycetes with stalked spore cases (about 58%  of all described species) increase the rate of airborne spore dispersal. .  which is  selection pressure for stalked habit morphology. . In addition. 
 the forest canopy  seems to be a favorable habitat for high species diversity presumably because of  the launching points at various heights above ground level (Tesmer and Schnit- tler. .  2007)  Tree canopy studies by Keller et al. . (2009) of living Juniperus virginiana  trees (Eastern Red Cedar) in central and southeastern USA over a period of  35 years were based on bark samples from approximately 250 trees. 
This study  documented the highest species diversity of myxomycetes (54 species) ever re- corded for a single tree species. . These were mostly field-collected corticolous  myxomycetes on bark samples above 2 m from living trees in open fields, along  fence lines, or in cemeteries. . Species of myxomycetes harvested from moist  chamber bark cultures were also included in this biodiversity list. . The bark of J. 
 virginiana is fibrous, spongy, and highly water absorbent, with a nearly neutral  pH, so it hosts many more species of myxomycetes that are pH generalists. . It  appears that this tree species also has launching and landing sites for myxo- mycete spores because of the tree’s habit of 20–30 m in height. 
 exposed trunks  without branches. .  and spatially separated horizontal branches. . Such architec- ture may account in part for the higher species biodiversity. 
Insects may also act as vectors of spore dispersal. .  especially beetles in the  family Leiodidae and species of Anisotoma and Agathidium (Stephenson and  Stempen. .  1994) and various species of flies in the family Mycetophilidae. 
Many  different organisms were directly observed either ingesting and/or feeding on  spores (Keller and Smith. .  1978)   or incidentally scattering spores with their  movements. .  including mites. 
 isopods   springtails. .  wood lice. .  tardigrades. .  col- lembolans. 
 psocoptera. .  dipterans. .  and millipedes (Ing. 
 1994)  Slugs Philomycus  carolinianus and P. . flexuolaris were reported to feed on immature sporangia of  the myxomycete Stemonitis axifera (Keller and Snell, 2002). . 30     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology SEM has resulted in more accurate species descriptions of spore ornamenta- tion and the discovery of fine structure not possible with a compound microscope  oil immersion optical lens (Keller et al.. .  1975; Keller and Schoknecht. 
 1989)   Badhamia ovispora and Fuligo megaspora represent a case study in earlier  inaccurate descriptions of spore ornamentation. . Badhamia ovispora was  misdescribed in the holotype description as smooth and oval-shaped when SEM  showed an allantoid shape and surface markings as minute, raised, plaque- like areas. . Fuligo megaspora was inaccurately described as having coarsely  tuberculate markings arranged in irregular lines. .  or rough-tuberculate. .  surface  markings often united into irregular and incomplete reticulation. 
 or tuberculate  to subreticulate. .  or closely spinulose. 
Comparisons using SEM, however, high- light the presence of an incomplete episporic reticulum with a serrated upper  edge that lacks the circular “halo” seen in bordered reticulate spores. . The ser- rated edge was undoubtedly the source of “closely spinulose” and the pattern of  the tips of the serrations the source of the “tuberculate” references. 
Most species of myxomycetes have spores with some kind of ornamenta- tion, spiny, warted, reticulate, or variations of these markings (Fig. . 1 15)  The  presence of a stalk to support the spore case promotes higher spore dispersal  rates than sessile sporangia or plasmodiocarps. . Furthermore. 
 smooth spores ap- pear to be rare in the myxomycetes (only one species has smooth spores in  the Physarales. .  Badhamia apiculospora. 
 and there are none in the Stemonitales  and Trichiales). . Interestingly, in contrast, the genus Licea (Lado, 2005–16) has  29 species with smooth spores out of a total of 59 species, most species in  the genus being sessile and not stalked. . There is no experimental evidence to  explain this disproportionately high number of smooth spores in Licea. 
Myxomycete spores float on the surface of water presumably because of sur- face tension and small size. . Wetting agents, such as solutions of ethyl alcohol, are  used to submerge spores in water mounts. 
Spore ornamentation also accounts for  hydrophobic effects as recently described by Hoppe and Schwippert (2014). . Their  study grouped spore ornamentation into three types: reticulate, spiny, and smooth. .  Spores of 17 species of myxomycetes were examined by SEM to characterize  spore ornamentation type and then the spores were photographed on the water  surface to determine contact angle. . Calculations were made to determine the sur- face energy of Metatrichia floriformis (reticulate spore type), Fuligo septica var. 
 candida (spiny spore type), and Licea parasitica (smooth spore type). . Their Fig   3 shows the reticulate spore type floating on the water surface, the spiny spore  type half sunken in the water, and the smooth spore type totally submerged in the  water. . Their conclusions were that the hydrophobicity effect was caused by the  spore ornamentation type and hydrophobines present on the spore surface. 
Spores have been purported to remain viable and germinate after 75 years. .   as in Hemitrichia clavata (Gray and Alexopoulos. 
 1968)   although it is possible  specimens that old may have been contaminated with the passage of time. . Spore  viability decreases with age, but some species have spores that germinate within  30 min, especially in freshly matured specimens of F. . septica that can be used  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    31 in teaching laboratories (Keller and Braun, 1999). . More than 120 species of  myxomycetes are recorded as having spores that germinate (Gray and Alexo- poulos, 1968), and this occurs either by the split or pore method. 
Typically,  members of Physarales germinate by a wedge or V-shaped split and members of  the Stemonitales (Stemonitis) and Liceales (Licea) by the pore method. . Three different life cycle types were proposed by Ross (1957) based on  spore germination events and the duration of the flagellate stage: (1) the briefly  flagellate type (protoplasts emerge from the spore as a myxamoeba which pro- duce flagella shortly thereafter); (2) the flagellate type (wherein germinating  spores give rise only to flagellate swarm cells that remain active 100–130 h);  and (3) the completely flagellate type (develops flagella immediately after leav- ing the spore and remains flagellated for longer periods of time—more than  130 h—and syngamy only occurs between two swarm cells). . The myxamoeba—Myxamoebae are colorless, uninucleate, and microscopic  (about 10 µm) and divide mitotically by extranuclear division. 
It is this stage  that is essential to complete the myxomycete life cycle since the swarm cell and  microcyst stages are not generally necessary. . The myxamoeba and swarm cell  are referred to as amoeboflagellates since each stage is interconvertible and con- dition-dependent: free water in the case of the swarm cell and a drier condition  in the case of the myxamoeba. . It is the myxamoebal stage that is capable of mul- tiple divisions that results in large populations of cells that are potentially im- mortal if a heterothallic strain is maintained. . In contrast, the swarm cell does not  divide but is capable of feeding during periods when excessive water precludes  myxamoebal feeding and division. 
These life cycle stages enable survival dur- ing unfavorable environmental periods. .  as well as take advantage of more fa- vorable growth conditions and at the same time maintain a population reservoir  of reproductive cells. .  especially in soil and forest litter. . Furthermore. 
 Lycogala  epidendrum. .  Trichia decipiens. .  and Tubulifera arachnoidea myxamoebae were  observed with bacterial prey food microorganisms. 
 and test measurements were  made to determine the highest rate of cell movement. . Results showed that T. . de- cipiens had the highest rate of cell movement, followed by T. . arachnoidea, and  L. 
epidendrum, showing species-specific patterns of cell motility. . In addition,  cell size of myxamoebae also differed significantly, with L. . epidendrum having  considerably larger myxamoebae (Hoppe and Kutschera, 2015). . Myxomycete myxamoebae that carry only one sexual mating type locus  represent sexual gametes that can be cultured in perpetuity and can build up  populations of gametes through growth and division (Fig. . 1 8)  Feeding behav- ior is by lobose pseudopodia that engulf primarily bacteria. 
Myxamoebae can  be transferred from culture to culture and through mating and genetic crosses it  was determined that mating types operated as a single locus-multiple allelic sys- tem. . Ray Collins and his students popularized Didymium iridis and myxomy- cetes as the system of choice to study mating types. .  apogamy   and plasmodial  incompatibility. 
 and this system still stands today as one of the great scientific  advancements in myxomycete research (Keller and Everhart. .  2010)  32     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The swarm cell—In the presence of free water, the swarm cell becomes a  biflagellate, comma-shaped swimming cell. 
Typically   two whiplash flagella are  attached to the anterior cone-shaped end: one short. .  recurved   and sometimes  difficult to see as it is appressed to the cell membrane. .  and the other much  longer. 
 propelling the swarm cell through the water. . The corkscrew swimming  motion is due to rotational body movement combined with flagellar beating that  is unique to the myxomycetes (Fig. . 1 8)  There appears to be little directional  movement. 
 but more experimentation is needed to determine how these cells  react to chemical gradients in the water (Everhart and Keller. .  2008; Keller and  Everhart. 
 2010)  Swarm cells are sexual gametes that may mate given genetically compatible  pairs. . Observation of many cultures of swarm cells in hanging drop slides and  in microchambers suggests that the swarm cell stage does not undergo cell divi- sion, sometimes referred to as binary fission. . Mating of two genetically com- patible swarm cells occurs through attachment at their posterior ends. . This is  sometimes comical to watch since as mating progresses the swimming motion  becomes more labored as the flagella at their free anterior end thrash about  making very little directional headway. 
Eventually the swarm cells fuse and  initiate the diploid phase. . This type of mating behavior is unusual especially  when compared to the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii wherein mating  occurs through the pairing and fusion of two equally biflagellate cells by the  tips of their flagella. . The microcyst—These structures are tiny (4–7 µm in diameter), highly re- fractive, thin-walled, uninucleate, and a highly resistant stage. . Encystment of  myxamoebae is induced by a combination of adverse environmental conditions  including lack of food. .  overcrowding. 
 accumulation of toxic metabolic byprod- ucts. .  drought or drier conditions. .  wide temperature fluctuations. .  or too much  water. 
Excystment occurs by the pore method as a portion of the wall is dis- solved and the protoplast exits. . Microcysts give myxomycetes the ability to  survive environmental extremes. .  and provide a potential reservoir of additional  propagating units that can shorten the time required to complete sporulation  (Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968)  The plasmodium—Once mating has occurred with the fusion of genetically  compatible haploid amoeboflagellates. .  the protoplasm comingles (plasmoga- my). 
 and then the two nuclei fuse (karyogamy) to form a diploid zygote in  heterothallic strains. . Early formation zygotes begin a series of synchronous in- tranuclear divisions without forming cell walls, thus resulting in a multinucleate  plasmodium. . Zygote coalescence was observed that also increases the size of  the plasmodium. . Over time the plasmodium feeds on bacteria, yeast, and other  microorganisms, including myxamoebae (cannibalism), by phagocytosis and  fusions with other plasmodia (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). . This results in  growth and an increase in size. 
There are three major types of plasmodia (previously defined) that are as- sociated with certain orders. .  as in the aphanoplasmodium with the Stemonitales  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    33 (Stemonitis spp.). .  phaneroplasmodium with the Physarales (Physarum spp.)  (Fig. . 1.2), and protoplasmodium with the Echinosteliales (Echinostelium spp.)  and with some Liceales (Licea spp.). . Perhaps a fourth type is a combination  of the first two as in the Trichiales (Perichaena spp.) (Gray and Alexopou- los, 1968). 
Of these, the phaneroplasmodial type is usually the largest and often  is brightly colored yellow (the most commonly encountered color in the field). .  Other colors are often seen, including white (very common), black, gray, lead- colored, red, rose, pink, orange, purplish, bluish, greenish hues, and colorless. 
 In many cases the plasmodium is unknown (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969). .  Plasmodial color is extremely variable in the same species and changes occur  with changes in pH or when incorporating the color of a pigmented bacterial  food source. 
 or as fruiting progresses. .  thereby suggesting color is not a very  dependable taxonomic character. . Plasmodial color when observed is recorded  in species descriptions (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968; Martin and Alexopou- los, 1969). 
Some properties of the myxomycete plasmodium deserve special mention. .  The regeneration properties are well documented since small sections of the  plasmodium can be transferred and subcultured on agar in petri dishes. . Cultures  can thus be maintained over many generations as long as a food source, often  Escherichia coli bacteria, and sterile old-fashioned oat flakes, is provided (Gray  and Alexopoulos, 1968). . Synchronous mitotic nuclear divisions occurring in the plasmodium were  filmed using time-lapse photography and showed the chromosomes all dividing  at the same stage. 
 for example. .  all nuclei in prophase at the same time. .  meta- phase at the same time. .  and so on (Koevenig. 
 1961)  Due to this unique property  of synchronization, the plasmodial stage of Physarum polycephalum has been  used experimentally as a model organism in cancer research. . Plasmodia of P. .  polycephalum can be cultivated under controlled axenic laboratory conditions. 
  and form a highly regulated amorphous. .  simple   plasma membrane-bound  “cell. . ” compared with cancerous cells that have lost their internal controls and  divide out of control to form a cancerous tumor (Keller and Everhart. 
 2010)  The plasmodium is membrane-bound, acellular, and naked. . However, the  veins are surrounded by a hyaline sheath with enclosed refuse matter that leaves  a “plasmodial track” on the agar surface. . Inside the sheath is a plasma mem- brane that encloses the living protoplasm consisting of an outer, more viscous  plasmagel and an inner, more liquid plasmasol (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). . What are the protoplasmic organelles and inclusions found in the plasmodia  of myxomycetes? Nuclei vary in size (3–8 µm). 
 appear plastic and capable of  changing shape. .  have a single nucleolus. .  and have tiny chromosomes that are  difficult to count but vary in 2N number from 50 to 100 based on light micro- scope counts. . Mitochrondria are present as small granular inclusions along with  pigment granules in colored plasmodia, food vacuoles, and contractile vacuoles. .  Food vacuoles are involved in the ingestion of solid food particles by a series  of events that occur at the advancing edge of plasmodium. . Engulfment results  34     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology when a depression and advancing sides surround a bacterium. 
 eventually en- closing it. .  digesting the contents. .  and finally egestion of waste products (Gray  and Alexopoulos. 
 1968)  Plasmodial membranes and pseudopods (lobopods) are also involved in the  formation of diploid myxamoebae and swarm cells (Fig. . 1.8), but life cycle il- lustrations usually fail to show these interesting and controversial morphologi- cal events. 
The observations of Indira (1964. .  1969) merit special consideration  in this regard as they include detailed descriptions and line drawing illustrations  of Physarum species. .  Arcyria cinerea. 
 and Stemonitis herbatica plasmodial de- velopment. .  and the direct formation of myxamoebae and swarm cells. . The latter  occurs in A. 
cinerea when the leading edge of advancing plasmodial fan cuts  off a small bit of protoplasm from a pseudopod as a myxamoeba that eventually  develops flagella and swims away. . A series of similar events occurred along  the veinlets. . These observations were repeated many times with many different  cultures, and this also occurred in S. . herbatica and thus perhaps represented  a method of asexual reproduction. 
Extra precautions were taken to ensure no  spores were present in the cultures. . The first author can confirm that Stemonitis  and Comatricha species grown in culture often have swarm cells that remain  abundant in the culture for prolonged periods of time. . Swarm cells that were  transferred to agar plates eventually developed into plasmodia even though mat- ing swarm cells were never observed. . Diploid swarm cells produced from ma- ture diploid plasmodia were never seen being ingested (Indira, 1969). . Phase contrast microscopic observations and photographic evidence were  obtained from microcultures that showed myxamoebae formation from a dip- loid, multinucleate plasmodium (Ross, 1967). . The culture was tentatively iden- tified as Physarum pusillum. 
 and although a rare event (and the ultimate fate of  the amoeboid cells could not be determined). .  the plasmodium had the poten- tial to produce diploid myxamoebae. . These are interesting implications for the  myxomycete life cycle. .  and additional questions arise: Are these myxamoebae  capable of mating or engulfed by the plasmodium and ingested or do they add to  the ploidy level? Do they encyst and play no role in the growth or development  of the plasmodium? Much more research is needed to answer these questions. . A special property of the myxomycete plasmodium is protoplasmic stream- ing, also called shuttle streaming, reversible or rhythmic streaming, or pulsating  streaming. 
This plasmodial internal movement can be observed easily in teach- ing laboratories even at lower magnifications of 10–20× and sometimes with  the naked eye. . Students are spellbound observing protoplasm moving forward  toward the feeding end, then interrupted by a pause, reversing directional flow,  and moving toward the posterior network end. 
Indeed, the streaming proto- plasm within a plasmodial strand can reach speeds of up to 1350 µm/s, which is  the fastest recorded rate for any microorganism (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). .  The rate of protoplasmic streaming can be timed with a stopwatch to deter- mine speed of flow, duration of directional flow forward, time of pause, and  time of reversible flow posteriorly. 
Students can do a simple experiment using   The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    35 P. . polycephalum plasmodia to answer the questions: Where is the longest dura- tion flow? Progressive toward the anterior end? Or regressive toward the pos- terior end? The sclerotium—Plasmodia are capable of forming a dormant. 
 resting    or resistant stage and thereby surviving adverse environmental conditions of  starvation. .  excessive cold or hot temperatures. .  extremely dry conditions. .  and  overwintering in temperate climates. 
The sclerotial stage of Physarum poly- cephalum is used to start cultures in teaching laboratories. . Sclerotia go through  a process of dehydration, forming large spherical isodiametric spherules. . These  spherules range from 24 to 40 µm and are multinucleate with up to 14 nuclei. 
 Sclerotia may form on the bark of living trees as a thin sheet of horny material  and accounts in part for the rather short periods of time (12–24 h) required to  complete the life cycle with fruiting bodies. . Physaraceous plasmodia may form  sclerotia on filter paper that encyst as thin flattened sheets of hardened matter,  often in the shape of the plasmodium (Fig. . 1 8)  Filter paper can be wetted, and  plasmodia can be revived on agar in 30–60 min as migrating and feeding plas- modia (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). . Sporulation—Once the plasmodium has been triggered to develop into a  fruiting body, the process cannot be reversed. . Fruiting body formation usually  occurs at night or in early morning hours (Fig. 
1 15A–C)  Experiments with  different light regimes showed that light triggers sporulation in species with  yellow-pigmented plasmodia. .  whereas nonpigmented plasmodia sporulated  equally well when exposed to light or in total darkness (Gray and Alexopou- los. 
 1968)  Other factors involved with the induction of sporulation include a com- bination of optimal growth age at a time when nutrients are exhausted, dark  incubation, and presence of niacin. . Importance of nutrient depletion can be  demonstrated by transferring an actively growing plasmodium to nutrient-poor  water agar that stimulates sporulation. . It appears that an optimal temperature of  20–25°C and more acid pH between 4.0 and 5.0 supports the growth and devel- opment of most species of myxomycetes. .  but this can vary somewhat with indi- vidual species. . Most of this experimental evidence is based on P. 
polycephalum,  and more research is required before broad generalizations can be made for the  myxomycetes (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). . The fruiting body sequence of  events was described for epihypothallic and subhypothallic development in the  terminology section and will not be repeated here. 
GENETICS AND REPRODUCTION Mating types are determined through a genetically regulated system that con- trols fusion of myxamoebae and swarm cells. . Compatible mating types will  result in the formation of a diploid zygote. . Heterothallic species of myxomy- cetes produce myxamoebae that require a different and compatible mating type  for production of plasmodia and fruiting bodies. . Consequently. 
 single-spore  36     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology isolates of heterothallic species never form zygotes. .  and do not produce plas- modia or fruiting bodies in culture or in nature. . Strains that can form fruiting  bodies from single-spore cultures are considered nonheterothallic, with two po- tential mechanisms through which this may arise: apogamy or homothallism. . In  general, it is thought that true homothallism does not exist, and heterothallism  is considered most common for myxomycetes. 
In apogamic (without gametes) isolates. .  the spores develop directly into  plasmodia due to their diploid (or polyploid) nuclei having two (or more) sets  of chromosomes. .  which carry two different mating type alleles. 
This diploid  state is maintained by an incomplete meiosis (automixis) during sporulation,  which results in the retention of the diploid state in the spore. . An alternate term  for this system is apomixes (without meiosis) since the lack of meiosis produces  the diploid amoebal state. . Many myxomycete isolates grown in culture often are nonheterothallic  (sometimes called homothallic), which would be considered a truly asexual  (apomictic; derived from a single spore) mechanism. 
Under this scenario. .  ger- mination of an apomictic spore occurs without undergoing meiosis. .  thus pro- ducing a diploid or polyploid myxamoeabe that is able to convert to the plasmo- dial stage without mating. . These nonheterothallic isolates are able to complete  the entire life cycle as 1N or 2N, without mating. . Homothallism. 
 which has never been demonstrated in the myxomycetes. .   would involve a sexual reproductive system with gamete fusion and meiosis  and an alternation between haploid amoeba and diploid plasmodia. . However    this system would require the absence of a mating type system. .  so that any two  haploid gametes (including identical sister amoeba derived from a single spore)  could fuse to produce the diploid plasmodium. 
A special type of homothal- lism (called selfing) can occur in some normally heterothallic isolates. . Haploid  amoeboid clones (which can undergo normal sexual fusion) may also produce  haploid plasmodia by themselves without crossing; this behavior is apparently  due to a mutation in the locus or loci governing heterothallic mating. . Homothallic mating, also called selfing or cryptic sex, may also exist,  wherein there has been a breakdown in the locus or loci governing heterothallic  control. . Clark and Haskins (2010) provides a table of heterothallic and nonhet- erothallic reports for 50 different species of myxomycetes. 
Mating type alleles—The mating system relies on a single gene locus (mt)  with multiple alleles, where some species have up to 18 different alleles. . These  genes govern sexual fusion. 
 where heterothallism (requiring different mt al- leles) is known from systems like Didymium iridis as being controlled by a  single-locus multiallelic system or in Physarum polycephalum two loci (matA. .   matB)   each with multiple alleles (Betterley and Collins. 
 1983; Clark. .  1995;  Collins. .  1975; Kawano et al.. .  1987)  In general. 
 the evolutionary role of het- erothallic mating systems is to ensure populations of closely related individuals  are unable to self. .  thus avoiding inbreeding depression or the accumulation of  deleterious alleles that negatively affect fitness. 
The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    37 Genetics of the plasmodium—There are genes known to regulate plasmo- dial fusion (plasmogamy). .  which is a system of compatibility determination  analogous to vegetative compatibility in true fungi. 
In total, there have been  more than 10 fusion genes identified that function to enable self- and nonself- recognition. . Between plasmodia that have compatible vegetative compatibil- ity groups (VCGs), fusion of plasmodia with different genomes can result in a  heterokaryotic (2N + 2N) nuclear state. . Inside the same plasmodium. .  fusion of  genetically different nuclei may occur to form a diploid (2N). .  following which. 
  meiosis of recombined heterokaryotic nuclei returns the plasmodium to a hap- loid (N) state. . Such recombination without formation of fruiting bodies is called  the parasexual cycle, although there is no published experimental evidence to  show that this can occur. . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We wish to thank Renato Cainelli from Trieste, Italy, who provided most of the beautiful  fruiting body photographic images. 
He used focal plane merging (z-stacking) which combines  multiple closeup images taken at different focal distances with a camera system to create  greater depth of field. . Computer software was used to stack and blend the images so that the  spherical spore case and stalk are both in focus. . Most of the structures shown here would  have portions of the final image out-of-focus with a standard camera macro lens. . Harold W   Keller provided images for Figs. . 1.1 and 1.2. 
Courtney Kilgore provided the artwork for the  life cycles and other illustrations that were newly prepared for this chapter. . Brooke Best at the  Botanical Research Institute of Texas provided editorial assistance with the manuscript and  Jim Clark gave advice on the genetics and life cycles. . REFERENCES Betterley, D.A., Collins, O.N.R., 1983. 
Reproductive systems, morphology, and genetical diversity  in Didymium iridis (Myxomycetes). . Mycologia 75, 1044–1063. .  Brown, R.M., Larson, D.A., Bold, H.C., 1964. 
Airborne alga: their abundance and heterogeneity. .  Science 143, 583–585. .  Clark, J., 1995. 
Myxomycete reproductive systems: additional information. . Mycologia 87, 779–786. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2010. 
Reproductive systems in the myxomycetes: a review. . Mycosphere 1  (4), 337–353. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2013. 
The nuclear reproductive cycle in the myxomycetes: a review. . My- cosphere 4 (2), 233–248. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2014. 
Sporophore morphology and development in the myxomycetes: a  review. . Mycosphere 5 (1), 153–170. 
 Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2016. . Mycosphere Essays 3. 
Myxomycete spore and amoeboflagellate biol- ogy: a review. . Mycosphere 7 (2), 86–101. .  Collins, O.N.R., 1975. 
Mating types in five isolates of Physarum polycephalum. . Mycologia 67, 98–107. .  de Bary, A., 1859. 
Die mycetozoan: Ein beitrag zur kenntnis der niedersten thiere. . Zeitschrift für  wissenschaftliche Zoologie 10, 88–175. .  Eliasson, U.H., Keller, H.W., 1999. 
Coprophilous myxomycetes: updated summary, key to spe- cies, and taxonomic observations on Trichia brunnea, Arcyria elaterensis, and Arcryia stipata. .  Karstenia 39, 1–10. .  38     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Everhart, S.E., Ely, J.S., Keller, H.W., 2009. . Evaluation of tree canopy epiphytes and bark character- istics associated with the presence of corticolous myxomycetes. 
Botany 87, 509–517. .  Everhart, S.E., Keller, H.W., 2008. 
Life history strategies of corticolous myxomycetes: the life  cycle, plasmodial types, fruiting bodies, and taxonomic orders. . Fungal Divers. . 29, 1–16   Everhart, S.E., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2008. 
Influence of bark pH on the occurrence and distribution  of tree canopy myxomycete species. . Mycologia 100, 191–204. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of the Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press Co., New York,  NY. .  Hatano, T., Arnott, H.J., Keller, H.W., 1996. . The genus Lindbladia. . Mycologia 88, 316–327. .  Hoppe, T., Kutschera, U., 2015. 
Species-specific cell mobility of bacteria-feeding myxamoebae in  plasmodial slime molds. . Plant Signal. . Behav  10 (9), e1074368. .  Hoppe, T., Schwippert, W.W., 2014. 
Hydrophobicity of myxomycete spores: an undescribed aspect  of spore ornamentation. . Mycosphere 5 (4), 601–606. .  Indira, P.U., 1964. 
Swarmer formation from plasmodia of myxomycetes. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc   47, 531–533. .  Indira, P.U., 1969. . On the plasmodium of myxomycetes. 
Univ  Iowa Stud  Nat  Hist  21 (2), 1–36. .  Ing, B., 1994. 
The phytosociology of myxomycetes. . New Phytol. 
126 (2), 175–201. .  Kawano, S., Kuroiwa, T., Anderson, R.W., 1987. 
A third multiallelic mating-type locus in Physarum  polycephalum. . Microbiology 133 (9), 2539–2546. 
 Keller, H.W., 1982. . The myxomycetes. . Parker, S.P. 
(Ed.), Synopsis and Classification of Living  Organisms, vol. . 1, McGraw Hill, New York, NY, pp. . 165–172   Keller, H.W., 2012. 
Myxomycete history and taxonomy: highlights from the past, present, and fu- ture. . Mycotaxon 122, 369–387. .  Keller, H.W., Aldrich, H.C., Brooks, T.E., 1973. 
Corticolous myxomycetes II: notes on Minaka- tella longifila with ultrastructural evidence for its transfer to the Trichiaceae. . Mycologia 62,  768–778. .  Keller, H.W., Aldrich, H.C., Brooks, T.E., Schoknecht, J.D., 1975. 
The taxonomic status of Bad- hamia ovispora: a myxomycete with unique spores. . Mycologia 67, 1001–1011. .  Keller, H.W., Braun, K.L., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of Ohio: Their Systematics, Biology, and Use in  Teaching (Ohio Biological Survey Bulletin New Series, Vol. . 13, No  2)  Ohio Biological Sur- vey, Columbus, OH. . Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1976. 
Corticolous myxomycetes IV: Badhamiopsis, a new genus for  Badhamia ainoae. . Mycologia 68, 834–841. .  Keller, H.W., Eliasson, U.H., 1992. 
Taxonomic evaluation of Perichaena depressa and Perichaena  quadrata (myxomycetes) based on controlled cultivation, with additional observations on the  genus. . Mycol  Res  96, 1085–1097. .  Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., 2010. 
Importance of myxomycetes in biological research and teaching. .  Fungi 3 (1), 29–43. .  Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., Skrabal, M., Kilgore, C.M., 2009. . Tree canopy biodiversity in temper- ate forests: exploring islands in the sky. 
S E  Biol  56 (1), 52–74. .  Keller, H.W., Kilgore, C.M., Everhart, S.E., Carmack, G.J., Crabtree, C.D., Scarborough, A.R.,  2008. 
Myxomycete plasmodia and fruiting bodies: unusual occurrences and user friendly study  techniques. . Fungi 1 (1), 24–37. .  Keller, H.W., O’Kennon, R., Gunn, G., 2016. 
World record myxomycete Fuligo septica fruiting  body (aethalium). . Fungi 9 (2), 6–11. .  Keller, H.W., Reynolds, D.R., 1971. 
A new Perichaena with reticulate spores. . Mycologia 63,   405–410. .  The Myxomycetes  Chapter | 1    39 Keller, H.W., Schoknecht, J.D., 1989. . Fuligo megaspora, a myxomycete with unique spore orna- mentation. . Mycologia 81, 454–458. .  Keller, H.W., Skrabal, M., Eliasson, U.H., Gaither, T.W., 2004. 
Tree canopy biodiversity in the  Great Smoky Mountains National Park: ecological and developmental observations of a new  myxomycete species of Diachea. . Mycologia 96, 537–547. .  Keller, H.W., Smith, D.W., 1978. 
Dissemination of myxomycete spores through the feeding activi- ties (ingestion-defecation) of an acarid mite. . Mycologia 70, 1239–1241. .  Keller, H.W., Snell, K., 2002. 
Feeding activities of slugs on myxomycetes and macrofungi. . Myco- logia 94, 757–760. .  Kilgore, C.M., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2009. 
Aerial reproductive structures on vascular plants as a  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 101, 303–317. .  Koevenig, J.L., 1961. . Slime Molds I: Life Cycle. 
U5518, 30 min. . sd  Color  Film  Bureau of Audio  Visual Instruction, Extension Division, University of Iowa, Iowa City. . Krug, J.C., Benny, G.L., Keller, H.W., 2004. . Coprophilous fungi. . In: Mueller, G.M., Bills, G.F.,  Foster, M.S. 
(Eds.), Biodiversity of Fungi: Inventory and Monitoring Methods. . Elsevier Aca- demic Press, Burlington, pp. . 467–499   Lado, C., 2005–2016. 
An online nomenclatural information system of Eumycetozoa. . Real Jardín  Botánico de Madrid, CSIC, Madrid, Spain. . Available from: http://www.nomen.eumycetozoa. . com Lado, C., Mosquera, J., Beltrán-Tejera, E., 1999. 
Cribraria zonatispora, development of a new  myxomycete with unique spores. . Mycologia 91, 157–165. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Carvajal, E.G., Aguilar, M., Hernández-Cre- spo, J.C., 2009. 
Description of a new species of Perichaena (myxomycetes) from arid areas of  Argentina. . Anales del Jardín Botánico de Madrid, 63–70, 66S1. .  Lister, A., 1894. 
A monograph of the mycetozoa. . Printed by order of the Trustees, London. . Lister, A., 1911. . A monograph of the mycetozoa. 
Revised by G. . Lister  Printed by order of the  Trustees of the British Museum, London. . Lister, A., 1925. . A monograph of the mycetozoa. 
Revised by G. . Lister  Printed by order of the  Trustees of the British Museum, London. . Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Ross, I.K., 1957. . Syngamy and plasmodium formation in the myxogastres. 
Am  J  Bot  44,  843–850. .  Ross, I.K., 1967. 
Formation of amoeboid cells from the plasmodium of a myxomycete. . Mycologia  59, 725–732. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Inflorescences of neotropical herbs as a newly discovered  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 94, 6–20. .  Snell, K.L., Keller, H., 2003. 
Vertical distribution and assemblages of corticolous myxomycetes on  five tree species in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. . Mycologia 95, 565–576. .  Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., Keller, H.W., Moore, D.L., Cavender, J.C., 2004. . Sampling the  biodiversity of mycetozoans. 
In: Mueller, G.M., Bills, G., Foster, M.S. . (Eds.), Biodiversity of  Fungi: Inventory and Monitoring Methods. . Elsevier Academic Press, Burlington, pp. . 547–576   Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press,  Portland. .  Sundberg, W.J., Keller, H.W., 1996. 
Myxomycetes: some tools and tips on collection, care, and use  of specimens. . Inoculum 47 (4), 12–14. .  Tesmer, J., Schnittler, M., 2007. 
Sedimentation velocity of myxomycete spores. . Mycol  Prog  6,  229–234. .  40     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology FURTHER READING Bundschuh, R., Altmüller, J., Becker, C., Nürnberg, P., Gott, J.M., 2011. 
Complete characteriza- tion of the edited transcriptome of the mitochondrion of Physarum polycephalum using deep  sequencing of RNA. . Nucleic Acids Res. 
39, 6044–6055. .  Kopp, D., 2012. . Assembly of the Didymium iridis Mitochondrial Genome by Genome Walking. 
 College of Science and Health Theses and Dissertations. . Paper 20  Depaul University, Chicago. 
 Available from: http://via.library.depaul.edu/csh_etd/20 41 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00002-0 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 2 The History of the Study  of Myxomycetes Bruce Ing*, Steven L. . Stephenson** *Applied Science and Environmental Biology. 
 University of Chester. .  Chester   United Kingdom;  **University of Arkansas. .  Fayetteville. 
 AR   United States THE EARLY PERIOD The earliest reference to a myxomycete is probably that of the German botanist  Thomas Panckow. .  whose Herbarium Portatile (Panckow. .  1654) contained a  brief description and a woodcut depicting what is likely to have been a species  of Lycogala (Fig. . 2 1)  We know nothing more about the writer. 
During the 17th  century, myxomycetes, if they were noticed at all, were grouped with the fungi,  which in turn were regarded as plants. . The first real attempt to classify plants  was made by the Frenchman Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (1656–1708). .  who  in his publication Institutiones rei Herbariae (de Tournefort. 
 1700) described  Lycoperdon sanguineum sphericum as a puffball. .  which is almost certainly   Lycogala epidendrum. . It is not surprising that this genus should be the first to  be noticed, since it is very common and rather conspicuous. . The next species to  be described is also common and conspicuous. 
The Frenchman Jean Marchant  (1659–1738) gave an account of Les Fleurs de la Tannée (Marchant. .  1727)    with “pale yellow foam-like masses on oak bark tan. .  which develops a golden  crust beneath which is a fine black powder.” This clearly refers to what we still  call “Flowers of tan. . ” namely Fuligo septica. . Marchant thought it was a sponge. 
The first scientific treatment of fungi, including myxomycetes, was by the  Italian Pier Antonio Micheli (1679–1737). . Born of a poor family, he was self- taught but developed into such a good botanist that he became superintendent of  public gardens in Florence, a royal appointment. . Regarded by later mycologists  as the founder of their discipline, he was interested in all groups of plants as  well as fungi and lichens. . The great luminary Elias Magnus Fries (1794–1878)  credited him with creating order out of the chaos in which fungal classifica- tion found itself at that time. . His work New Genera of Plants. .  Arranged After  the Method of Tournefort (Micheli. .  1729) included. 
 within the division Fungi. .   four genera of myxomycetes—Clathroides. .  Clathroidastrum. .  Lycogala   and  42     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology  Mucilago. 
The first two contain species of Arcyria and Stemonitis, and the oth- ers encompass members of genera, such as Reticularia, Fuligo, Comatricha,  Physarum, Didymium, and Trichia. . Ceratiomyxa is recognizable under the rust  genus Puccinia. 
Micheli appears to be the first person to have used a  microscope  in the study of fungi and to realize the role of spores. . The Swiss Albrecht von Haller (1708–77) published A Systematic and  Descriptive List of Plants Indigenous to Switzerland (von Haller, 1742). 
The  myxomycete genera are those of Micheli with two additions—Embolus and  Sphaerocephalus. . As circumscribed by Haller, these contained an odd mix- ture of species now placed in Physarum, Comatricha, and Trichia. . Haller was  not sure about Clathroides but included five species, one of which is definitely  Metatrichia vesparia. . A more comprehensive account of Swiss plants was pub- lished in 1762, including the description of the genus Trichia, although not  quite as we know it today. . Haller was not impressed with the binomial system  of nomenclature as proposed by Linnaeus and did not adopt it. 
The Englishman  John Hill (1716–75) published A History of Plants (Hill, 1751), which added  little to our knowledge but gave us the name Arcyria. . He was convinced that  there were male and female flowers in the fruiting bodies. . As was the case in  those days, his names were often long and flowery sentences in Latin. 
Eventually, we come to Carl Linnaeus (1701–78), who was born in rural  Sweden. . Although he trained in medicine, his interests were in the natural  world. 
He set about putting this world in order and in several seminal works he  FIGURE 2.1 (A) Title page from Thomas Panchkow’s Herbarium Portatile, published in 1654. .  (B) Woodcut which accompanied what is apparently the first known description of a myxomycete. .  (Images used with permission from the Natural History Museum Library and Archives.) The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    43 largely achieved this goal. . His Systema Plantarum (Linnaeus, 1763) has 1515  pages of higher plants but only 17 pages of fungi, including 7 species of myxo- mycetes in the fungal genera Lycoperdon, Clathrus, and Mucor. . He was clearly  not very interested in fungi. 
Perhaps his greatest gift was the binomial system  of nomenclature. . As was the custom at that time, the Latin name was a long  descriptive phrase, beginning with a word that we would recognize as a generic  name. . Linnaeus’ innovation was that he placed in the margin a single epithet  appropriate to that species. . Whether this was deliberate we cannot know, but  we can be grateful for it. 
His few specimens are in the herbarium of the Linnean  Society of London. . The impact of Linnaeus was that he inspired botanists in  the second half of the 18th century to add to our knowledge. 
Among these were  the Austrian Giovanni Antonio Scopoli (1723–88). .  who published Flora Car- niolica (Scopoli. 
 1772)   which included several myxomycetes. .  and the German  Jakob Christian Schäffer (1718–90). .  whose Fungi Bavarici (1762–74) listed six  myxomycetes in the genus Mucor (Schäffer. 
 1762)  August Johann Georg Carl Batsch (1761–1802) was born in Jena. .  Germany    and published his Elenchus Fungorum (Batsch. .  1783) with descriptions in Ger- man and Latin and color engravings of eight species of myxomycetes. .  of which  those of Cribraria cancellata (as Mucor) and Metatrichia vesparia (as Lyco- perdon) are very good. 
Jean Baptiste François Bulliard (often mistakenly called  Pierre) (1752–93) was born in France and is best known for his Histoire des  Champignons de la France (Bulliard, 1791). . The myxomycetes were placed  with puffballs under four genera—Lycoperdon, Sphaerocarpus, Reticularia,  and Trichia. . The arrangement of the 30 or so species is confusing, but the il- lustrations are so good that the species can be identified with confidence. 
Due to  this, this work became an early standard reference for the myxomycetes. . Heinrich Adolph Schrader (1767–1836) was Professor of Botany at Göt- tingen in Germany and was primarily interested in flowering plants. . In 1797,  he published his Nova Genera Plantarum, and all of the organisms considered  were myxomycetes (Schrader, 1797). 
Among these were Cribraria, Dictydi- um, Licea, and Didymium, which we still recognize. . He included 27 species,  which are well described. 
This is especially the case for Cribraria. . He noted  that although the organisms he considered were regarded as fungi, they devel- oped from a mucilaginous state. . Heinrich Tode (1733–97) seems to be the first  worker to describe the movement of a plasmodium, in his Fungi of Mecklen- burg (Tode, 1790). . He called it Mesenterica tremelloides but clearly did not  understand what was involved. 
Charles Persoon (1761–1836) was born in South  Africa of a Dutch father. . On his parents’ death, he came to Europe and visited  many universities, learning as much as possible about fungi. . In 1801 his Syn- opsis Methodica Fungorum appeared (Persoon, 1801). 
The myxomycetes were  still classified with the puffballs and Mucor but were now placed in 11 genera,  all still current, and most of the 80 species he considered are still accepted. . Per- soon renamed Mesenterica as Phlebomorpha in 1823 but had no more idea of  its significance than Tode. 
His collections are in Leiden. . 44     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The Scot James Dickson (1738–1822) described and illustrated Leocar- pus fragilis (as Lycoperdon) in 1785 (Dixon, 1785). . During the same period  James Sowerby of London (1757–1822) was producing his Coloured Figures  of English Fungi and Mushrooms, which appeared between 1797 and 1809  (Sowerby, 1809). . These contained some of the best drawings of myxomyce- tes produced thus far. 
In 1801 and 1803, Heinrich Christian Friedrich Schum- acher (1757–1830) published two accounts of the plants of Saeland, Denmark  (Schumacher, 1803). . One hundred species of myxomycetes were described, of  which 72 are ascribed to Schumacher himself. 
There are no illustrations. . How- ever, of the 72 species, only 2 are still accepted today. 
A far more important partnership was formed at the same time as Schum- acher’s poor effort. . Ludwig David von Schweinitz (1780–1834) was born at  Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, a Moravian colony. . In 1798, he came to Germany  to study and there met Johannes Baptiste von Albertini (1769–1831), and they  became friends. . The two worked together for some years and produced their  Conspectus Fungorum in 1805 (Albertini and Schweinitz, 1805), with its color  illustrations and full descriptions. 
Seventy-three species of myxomycetes were  included but still considered as fungi. . Nine of the species were new to sci- ence, and six of these are still accepted today. 
Schweinitz returned to Ameri- ca and published some of the first accounts of North American myxomycetes   (Schweinitz, 1822, 1832). . During the first part of the 19th century, a number of  European botanists described myxomycetes. 
These included Johann Heinrich  Friedrich Link (1767–1851), L.P.F. . Ditmar and Christian Gottfried  Ehrenberg  (1795–1876) from Germany. .  the Norwegian Søren Christian Sommerfelt  (1794–1838). .  and the Swiss Augustin Pyramus de Candolle (1778–1841)   (Ditmar. 
 1813; Ehrenberg. .  1818; Link. .  1809; Sommerfelt. .  1826)  Their new  species are still recognized. 
The most eminent and influential mycologist of the period was Elias Mag- nus Fries. . Born at Femsjö in rural Sweden, he grew up surrounded by nature  and became devoted to the study of fungi. . Beginning in 1815 and continuing  for some 60 years, he published many seminal works that laid the foundations  of modern mycology. . In his Systema Mycologicum (Fries, 1829), he produced  the best work thus far on myxomycetes. . Although Fries still included them in  the Gasteromycetes, he erected a separate suborder—the Myxogastres (or slime  stomachs)—by virtue of the mucilaginous early stage, the plasmodium. . Thus  began the great debate of the 19th century as to how to classify the myxomyce- tes, a problem finally resolved only in the late 20th century. . Fries investigated  the plasmodium of several species, now aware that this was part of the life  cycle. 
 The main gap in his work was the lack of microscopic detail of spore ornamen- tation, calcareous inclusions, or, for example, the spiral bands on the elaters of  Trichia. . These had been observed and commented on by the  microscopist R.A. 
 Hedwig in 1802. . In his Flora Cryptogamica Germaniae (Wallroth. .  1833)   Carl Friedrich  Wilhelm Wallroth (1792–1857) coined the term myxomycetes. 
 or slime fungi. .   The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    45 for what had long been called the Myxogastres. .  and so the debate continued. 
 One admirer of Fries was the Reverend Miles Joseph Berkeley (1803–89). . A  country parson with a large family, he found time to become known as the fa- ther of British mycology. . However, his interests were actually worldwide and  his correspondents came from all corners of the globe. . He was sent specimens  from Australia, North America, Cuba, Sri Lanka, as well as many parts of Eu- rope and all parts of Great Britain. 
He is best known for his work on the larger  fungi, in which he followed the Friesian line, but he was also active in studies  of the myxomycetes. . His book British Fungi (Berkeley, 1836) rapidly became  the standard work on the subject. . Under the Myxogastres, he recorded 63 spe- cies from Britain, and 4 of these were species new to science. 
In addition to his  own work. .  Berkeley was an enthusiastic collaborator. 
 notably with Christopher  Edmund Broome of Batheaston. .  Somerset (1802–86). 
 with whom he described  the beautiful Diderma lucidum from a ravine at Dolgarrog in North Wales. . For  many years, they published a long series of Notices of British fungi in the An- nals and Magazine of Natural History, an influential journal of its day. . He also  collaborated with Moses Ashley Curtis (1801–72) and Henry William Ravenel  (1814–87) on American species. 
Like Fries, Berkeley did not refer to micro- scopic characters but preferred to use features visible with a hand lens. . Perhaps  less well known is the fact that he was the first to recognize that the potato  famine which occurred in the Irish and West Highlands of Scotland during the  1840s was due to a blight caused by the fungus-like organism Phytophthora  infestans and not to bad air as had been suggested by many others. 
As to the  debate on the taxonomic affinities of the myxomycetes, Berkeley came down  on the side of the fungal relationship because the spores were enclosed in a sac. .  The nature of the plasmodium and the earlier amoeboid stage (the myxamoe- bae) in the life cycle had been used by the next scientist (de Bary) to make a  major contribution to the study of myxomycetes as evidence of their animal. .  or  at least protozoan. .  affinities. 
However, Berkeley disagreed. . THE FIRST SCIENTIFIC STUDIES Heinrich Anton de Bary (1831–88) trained as a medical practitioner but soon  turned his attention to botany and held senior posts at several German and Aus- trian universities. . He was especially interested in the physiology, morphology,  and developmental biology of fungi, and his descriptions of the structure and  life cycle of myxomycetes were the most complete to date. . In his 1859 book Die  Mycetozoa (or fungus animals), he brought into use a term which has remained  with us in one-way or another ever since (de Bary, 1859). 
He germinated spores  and cultivated the resultant “swarm cells” and suggested that the plasmodium  was formed by the union of myxamoebae. . He also demonstrated that the spo- rocysts (or fruiting bodies) arose from the plasmodium. 
His later book, The  Comparative Morphology and Biology of the Fungi, Mycetozoa and Bacteria  (de Bary, 1884), is a classic of its type. . 46     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology During this most productive era. 
 Leo Cienkowski (1822–87) from Poland  observed the union of myxamoebae and introduced the term “plasmodium” in a  paper published in 1863 (Cienkowsky. .  1863)  He also observed the ingestion of  food particles, thus strengthening the idea of a protozoan affinity for the myxo- mycetes. 
Also active at this time were Oscar Brefeld (1839–1925). .  who added  to our knowledge of the biology of the group. .  and the Russians Mikhail Stepa- novich Voronin (1833–1903) and Andrei Sergeevich Famintsin (1835–1918). .   who worked out the life history of Ceratiomyxa. 
 which was outlined in a paper  published in 1873 (Famintsin and Woronin. .  1873)  As the century drew nearer to its close, several more stars began to shine  in the myxomycete galaxy. 
The Pole Józef Tomasz Rostafinski (1850–1928)  compiled the first monograph of the group. . His Śluzowce Monografia was writ- ten with the guidance of de Bary and published in 1873 (Rostafinski, 1873). . It  was beautifully illustrated and rapidly became the standard work on the myxo- mycetes. . A large number of Rostafinki’s names are still in use. 
Unfortunately. .   Śluzowce Monografia was never translated into English in full. .  but a partial  translation was made by Mordecai Cubitt Cooke (1825–1914). 
 who was Head  of Mycology at the Royal Botanic Gardens. .  Kew  Cooke’s The Myxomycetes of  Great Britain was published in 1877 (Cooke, 1877). 
Cooke also wrote on some  American collections and collaborated with several other workers. . In addition,  he produced books of a more general kind in an effort to popularize fungi. 
Cooke’s successor at Kew was George Massee (1847–1917), who was one  of the founders of the British Mycological Society and served as its first presi- dent. . He also wrote handbooks on British fungi but is best remembered for  his Monograph of the Myxogastres, published in 1892 (Massee, 1892). . The  title is instructive, since to Massee myxomycetes were fungi and he argued  against the idea that they might be related to protozoans. . The book has useful   descriptions and clear, color illustrations. 
Numerous species were introduced as  new, but few of these have survived. . It is possible that he was aware of another  book on its way and was in a hurry to publish, and there is some evidence of   carelessness. . Massee was an argumentative Yorkshireman who would not take  “yes” for an answer. . His relationship with the following worker was stormy. 
ARTHUR AND GULIELMA LISTER Arthur Lister F.R.S. . (1830–1908) (Fig. . 2.2) was the son of Joseph Jackson  Lister F.R.S., a distinguished microscopist, whose brother was Joseph Lister  (1827–1912), the pioneer in antiseptic surgery. 
Members of his family were  Quakers, and they loved all things natural. . He was a keen sportsman and a  skilled artist. . His profession was ultimately that of wine merchant, and he and  his family lived comfortably in a town house at Leytonstone in east London,  close to Epping Forest. . The family also owned a house at Highcliffe, near Lyme  Regis in Dorset, and both areas benefited from his fieldwork. 
He became inter- ested in myxomycetes in 1877 and quickly became immersed in the collections  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    47 at Kew. .  the British Museum. .  Strasbourg and Paris. 
He also began to experiment  with plasmodia and in 1877 demonstrated protoplasmic streaming in Badhamia  utricularis to the Linnean Society (Lister, 1888). . He also showed clearly the  ingestion of food particles by plasmodia. 
From the onset of his work on myxo- mycetes, he was accompanied by his daughter, Gulielma, who acted as his sec- retary, field companion and fellow artist. . (More information on Miss Lister. .  as  she was universally known. 
 is provided later.) Lister had a wide range of cor- respondents from all parts of the world. .  and specimens were constantly arriving. 
  examined. .  described. 
 and deposited in the Botany Department at the British  Museum (Natural History) in South Kensington. . Papers on the myxomycetes  of Japan. 
 Antigua   and many other countries. .  but especially from Britain. 
 filled  the pages of the Journal of Botany for many years. .  initially by himself and then  in collaboration with Gulielma. .  who continued the tradition after her father’s  death. 
The assiduous fieldwork and intuitive understanding of what constituted  a species culminated in the appearance in 1894 of A Monograph of the Myceto- zoa, published by the museum (Lister, 1894). . This was immediately seen to be  superior to the book recently produced by Massee. 
 and if they had not been on  bad terms before. .  they certainly were after Lister’s treatment of the myxomyce- tes was published. . Massee edited the Naturalist, an influential journal published  in Yorkshire, and many of his editorials were full of barbed criticism, some  very spiteful, of his rival’s work. 
Lister replied only when he felt suitably irri- tated, and always in more moderate tones. . It was a classic case of a professional  (Massee) being jealous of a better amateur (Lister). . However, Lister had the  FIGURE 2.2 Arthur Lister. 
(From Mycological Notes. .  1919.) 48     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology last laugh. 
 as he became a Fellow of the Royal Society and Massee did not! He  continued to write papers with Gulielma until his death. . Meanwhile, across the Atlantic a new star was rising. 
Thomas  Houston   Macbride (1848–1934) was impressed with Lister’s A Monograph of the   Mycetozoa and became determined to add more information on the American  range of species. . He accomplished this in 1899 with his North American Slime  Moulds (Macbride, 1899), with a second edition in 1922 (Macbride, 1922). .  These two works are of particular importance because they were the basis of yet  another work, The Myxomycetes (Macbride and Martin, 1934), which Macbride   coauthored with George W. . Martin (1886–1971). 
This aspect of the history of  the study of myxomycetes will be picked up later in this chapter. . Gulielma Lister (1860–1949) (Fig. . 2.3) continued her father’s work and also  inherited his status as the world authority on myxomycetes. . She prepared the  second edition of A Monograph of the Mycetozoa (Lister and Lister, 1911) and  included beautiful color paintings. . The third edition (Lister, 1925) was much  enlarged through her own work. 
As a skilled artist. .  she produced some of the  finest drawings ever made of myxomycetes. .  and we are fortunate that the origi- nals of both Listers’ illustrations have been carefully preserved in the Botany  Library of the Natural History Museum. . In her will, she bequeathed half to  the Museum and half to the British Mycological Society, of which she had  been president on two different occasions. . In 1904, she became one of the first  women to be admitted as a Fellow of the Linnean Society, hitherto an all-male  preserve. . In 1929, she was elected as vice-president. 
She continued to describe  species, produce valuable lists, and communicate with workers everywhere, but  with advancing years she began to confine her activities to Epping Forest. . Here  she trained a new generation of British students of her beloved “myxies.” Her artistic skills were not confined to myxomycetes. 
She provided the   figures for Dallimore and Jackson’s Handbook of the Coniferae (Dallimore  FIGURE 2.3 Gulielma Lister. . (From Transactions of the British Mycological Society. .  1950.) The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    49 and Jackson. 
 1923   with editions in 1931 and 1948) and the color plates for  F.J. . Hanbury’s Illustrated Monograph of the British Hieracia (1889–98)   (Hanbury, 1889). 
With her father, she had recorded their observations on the  Mycetozoa in a series of notebooks, 74 in all, covering 60 years. . The Lister  notebooks contain a wealth of information—descriptions. 
 sketches   drawing  and paintings. .  notes on particular specimens. 
 lists from field trips. .  letters from  correspondents. .  and draft replies. 
The entries began in 1887 and the last one  appeared in 1947. . On her death, she bequeathed all the notebooks to the British  Mycological Society, and they are kept in the Cryptogamic Botany Department  of the Natural History Museum in South Kensington. . Fuller biographies can be  found in Scott (1908), Wakefield (1950), and Ainsworth and Balfour-Browne  (1960). . Joseph Jackson Lister F.R.S. 
(1857–1927) was the son of Arthur and  brother of Gulielma. . He was primarily a zoologist and spent his entire career at  Cambridge University. . He contributed the article on the Mycetozoa to the 11th  edition of Encyclopaedia Britannica (1911). 
As was the case for her father, Gulielma collaborated with workers around  the world. . Of interest was her association with William Cran (1854–1933), who  had sent specimens to Arthur from Antigua, where he had been a lecturer at  a theological college. . On his return to Scotland, he became a Congregational  minister at Skene, near Aberdeen. 
Gifted with amazing eyesight, he started to  research the minute myxomycetes found on the bark of living trees. . With G   Lister he described what we now call Macbrideola cornea and  Paradiacheopsis  fimbriata (Lister, 1917, 1938). . His notebooks and collections are in the her- barium of the Botany Department of Aberdeen University. . Gulielma Lister could also be credited with publishing the first broad ac- count of myxomycete ecology. . In a paper presented to the Essex Field Club, she  outlined the range of ecosystems and niches in which these organisms  occur. .  Later work on this aspect of the myxomycetes can be regarded as an extension  of what was provided in this paper (Lister, 1918). 
After her death, the work was  continued by several excellent amateurs, including W.D. . Graddon, J. . Ross, and  H.J. 
Howard  The latter was based in Norwich and in addition to his  efforts to  continue to record British species, he also collected material in  Switzerland  and elsewhere. . His collections are in the Castle Museum, Norwich, with du- plicates at Kew and the Natural History Museum in London. . Howard also  wrote on myxomycete ecology and was the first to comment on the  differences  that existed from place to place in the assemblages of myxomycetes present   (Howard, 1948). 
MORE RECENT STUDIES IN EUROPE The new generation began work in 1957 when Bruce Ing (b. . 1937) became  a student at the University of Cambridge. 
In his first week, while looking for  bryophytes, he encountered L. . fragilis  After searching in second hand book- shops. .  he discovered a small booklet illustrating the models of myxomycetes  50     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology in the Natural History Museum in London. 
The authors were the Listers, and  there was a drawing of Leocarpus. . On referring to the 1925 Monograph in the  library with its beautiful paintings, he was captivated. 
As there was no oth- er worker  specializing in myxomycetes at that time in Britain. .  he decided to   devote as much time as possible to determine which species had been recorded  as  British and Irish. . This culminated in the first checklist of British species  in 1968 (Ing, 1968), which has been revised twice (Ing, 1980, 1985, 2000b). 
 He also communicated with other workers around the world. .  notably George  Martin and Constantine Alexopoulos in America and especially with Elly Nan- nenga-Bremekamp (born as Neeltje Elizabeth Bremekamp) in the Netherlands. .   with whom he developed a strong working relationship until her untimely death  in 1996. 
Early on in his career he was fortunate to be able to work on material  brought back from Nigeria as a result of a student expedition to that country. .   and in 1964 he published a new genus. 
 Metatrichia. .  which is essentially tropical  apart from the common Metatrichia floriformis (Ing. 
 1964)  A second expedi- tion to  Nigeria allowed another life-long collaboration (this time with Roland  McHugh) to develop, especially in regard to Irish myxomycetes (see later). .  However, his most satisfying achievement was to organize the first  International  Congress on the Systematics and Ecology of Myxomycetes, which was held in  Chester, England, in 1993. . The congress has been held every 3 years since  then. 
His work on ecology was summarized in 1994 in a paper on the phytoso- ciology of myxomycetes (Ing. .  1994)   and it is likely that the paper redirected  some of the energy of other workers to this aspect of their biology. 
His work  on the  British and Irish species resulted (Ing, 1999b) in the first comprehensive  account of the species of these islands, although this is now in need of updat- ing and  revision. . Ing’s collections and myxomycete library and records will be  eventually  deposited at Kew. 
During this same period. .  interest in the group increased. .  and Ing was joined  by Peter Holland. 
 Roland McHugh. .  and David Mitchell in studies which cov- ered a wide geographical area and triggered further collaboration with workers  overseas. . Some of these studies will be discussed later. 
In Europe, the most  prominent worker was Nannenga-Bremekamp. . She became the person to con- sult after both Martin and Alexopoulos had died. . She enjoyed a fruitful col- laboration with virtually all the leading workers of the day and especially with  Yukinori Yamamoto from Japan. 
Her extensive collections and notebooks are  now housed in the Botanical Department of the National Museum in Brussels. . Elsewhere in Europe, the pace of study was quickening as a new genera- tion of postwar scientists and naturalists took up the study of myxomycetes. .  In Greece, there was little interest until Constantine Alexopoulos, on a sab- batical from his university in America, spent a year collecting material from  all over the country. . This was the stimulus needed, and workers from many  parts of Europe began to add more data. . This will be summarized in a pend- ing publication by Ing and Zervakis. 
Visits to Greece by Ing in 1988 and 1998  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    51 have yielded many more species. .  including nivicolous examples. .  such as   Dianema  aggregatum. 
 new to Europe. . Schnittler and Novozhilov (1993) added   Lepidoderma  crustaceum from Crete. . A few corticolous species from Cyprus  were reported by Ing (1987a), and a foray of the British Mycological Society  in 2011 yielded over 100 species, all but one being new records for the island. 
 The first reports from Bulgaria were by Hinkova (1951), followed by Hinkova  and Draganov (1965). . Markov (1962) added more data, while Reid and Vanev  (1984) and Vanev and Reid (1986) included four species of myxomycetes. . A  modern checklist of the myxomycetes of the former Yugoslavia was provided  by Ing and Ivancevic (2000). . The Mediterranean region, with its preponderance of limestone ecosystems,  has been well studied, and a valuable synthesis of the occurrence of myxomyce- tes was provided by Lado (1994). . The first checklist from Malta (Briffa, 1998)  included 73 species, an indication of the favorable conditions in most parts of  the Mediterranean region. 
Briffa et al. . (2000) discussed some of the rarer spe- cies on the list. . Surprisingly, there has been no overview of the myxomycetes  of Italy. . A first list was published by Pirola (1968) and expanded by Pirola and  Credaro (1971), but no systematic studies of the entire country have been car- ried out. 
The species found in the alpine region of the Alto-Adige in the Sud  Tirol area of the north were studied by Ing (2003). .  and a British Mycological  Society foray to Sardinia in 2006 produced over 100 species. . A recent devel- opment has been the transfer of annual “days of study” of nivicolous myxo- mycetes from the Savoie Alps, in France, to an area to the south of Turin, in  Italy. 
This concentration of interest has been a factor in recruiting many more  students of myxomycetes as well as generating far more appreciation among  other mycologists and naturalists. . Spain can claim to be one of the most active and productive countries in  terms of producing a modern generation of myxomycologists. 
The main centers  are the National Botanic Garden in Madrid. .  where Carlos Lado and his team  are based; the University of Alcala de Henares. .  with Gabriel Moreno and his  team; and the University of Barcelona. .  with Enric Gràcia. 
Their combined influ- ence is now worldwide, especially in Latin America, and their contribution to  our knowledge cannot be overestimated. . The development of other centers in  Spain has been encouraged by them. . Their home activities embrace the Balearic   Islands and the Canary Islands, both groups being provinces of Spain. 
Research  based at the University of La Laguna on Tenerife. .  in cooperation with the vari- ous National Parks in the islands. .  has meant that the archipelago is well docu- mented and several new species have been found in the unique environments of  the islands (Beltrán Tejera. .  2001)  The nature of the Spanish legacy is shown in  a brief selection of their publications. . Nomenmyx, a nomenclatural database, was published by Lado (2001) and  has become a most valuable tool for taxonomists. 
Lado and Pando (1997) pro- duced the first part of a treatment of myxomycetes in Flora Mycologica Iberica. .  Lado and Siquier (2014) published an illustrated catalogue of the species found  52     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology in the Balearic Islands, and Moreno et al. . (2001) made extensive use of elec- tron micrographs in the account of the species occurring in the province of Ex- tremadura. 
The body of new information that the current generation of Spanish  myxomycologists has generated is indeed remarkable. . Portugal has a long history of studies of myxomycetes, with the earliest list  being that of Torrend (1908), who reported about 100 species. 
In more recent  times, M.G. . Almeida, at the University of Lisbon, began a series of studies  which lasted more than 20 years and extended to the myxomycetes of Portugese  territories in Africa. . The Azores archipelago is a province of Portugal, and an  interesting range of species, including Perichaena microspora on mule dung,  was reported by Ing. 
France has a long and distinguished history for the study of myxomycetes,  but like so many other countries, this was interrupted by two wars. . In the 20th  century, as with much of Europe, the new peace brought with it a renewed in- terest in all branches of natural history, and France was no exception. . With the  oldest mycological society in the world—the French society was founded in  1895 (1 year before the British!)—there was a firm foundation of mycology and  a tradition to foray intensively as both a scientific and a social activity. 
There  had been several earlier national and regional accounts. .  but the first modern list  was provided by Cochet (1977). .  with additions and correction in 1980 and 1984  by Cochet and Bozonnet (Cochet and Bozonnet. .  1980   1984)  Bozonnet himself  was a pioneer in the studies of nivicolous myxomycetes in France and. 
 together  with other members of the Fédération Mycologique et Botanique Dauphine- Savoie. .  built up a great tradition of alpine mycology in the French Alps. . One of  his colleagues is Marianne Meyer, who became the doyenne of alpine myxo- mycology. . One of her lasting achievements was the inauguration of the “study  days” on nivicolous myxomycetes each spring in the Savoie Mountains where  she lives. . These meetings were heavily attended by enthusiastic French natural- ists and also attracted myxomycologists from all over Europe to the little vil- lage of St. 
Paul sur Isère. . Moreover   her collaboration with Père Bozonnet and  Michel Poulain. 
 the latter known for his brilliant photographs of myxomycetes. .   resulted in the publication in 2011 of Les Myxomycètes in two volumes. 
This  was not just an account of the French species; it also contains a high proportion  of the global total and will be a major reference source for many years to come. . The Netherlands have a long history of mycology, and myxomycetes have  figured strongly. . During the second half of the 20th century. 
 Elly Nannenga- Bremekamp patiently collected. .  illustrated. .  and described numerous species  from all over the world and collaborated in print with virtually all the leading  workers of the period. . Her many papers, mostly in English, were full of impor- tant details relating to particular species. . In addition to exhaustively survey- ing the Dutch species, she visited several European countries, notably France,  Germany, Switzerland, and Great Britain. 
Her major work was De Nederlandse  Myxomyceten, published (in Dutch) in 1974 (Nannenga-Bremekamp, 1974),  with separate additions in 1979 and 1983. . It has been translated into English,  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    53 with the rather pretentious title of A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes, by Feest  and Burggraaf (1991). 
In spite of some features relating to poor production and  a number of omissions in the work. .  it is a very useful guide to a major portion  of the assemblage of myxomycete found in Europe but is of less use elsewhere. . Belgium’s first note seems to be that of Marchal (1895), in which he de- scribed Trichia varia var. 
fimicola (now recognized as T. . fimicola) along with  a range of coprophilous fungi. . Based at the National Botanic Garden at Meise. 
  Jean Rammeloo carried out systematic studies on many critical genera (e.g.. .   Rammeloo. 
 1978a) but perhaps is better known for his work in the former Bel- gian colonies in Africa. . Inspired by him, Myriam de Haan published an an- nual series of additions to the Belgian list since 1996 (Haan, 1996). 
Wishing to  encourage children to enjoy myxomycetes. .  she has produced the delightfully  illustrated The Adventures of Mike the Myxo. 
 which introduces the reader to the  structure. .  life cycle. .  and ecology painlessly! One of the earliest references from Austria is that of Sauter (1841). .  after  whom Diderma sauteri was named. 
 who listed myxomycetes from the vicinity  of Salzburg. . He was followed by Wettstein (1886), who recorded the fungus flora  of Steiermark (the former Styria). . A major work to include Austrian species was  Schinz’s volume in Rabenhorst’s Kryptogamenflora. .  which covered Austria. .  Ger- many. 
 and Switzerland and was very much based on the second edition of Lister’s  monograph (Schinz. .  1920)  This can be regarded as the first comprehensive list  from all three countries. 
Gottsberger (1966) expanded on the previous studies in  a detailed account from Steiermark. . In recent years, the leading worker in Austria  has been Wolfgang Nowotny, who has written on the species in Upper Austria but  is best known for his coauthorship of Die Myxomyceten (see later). . Germany   as  in so many areas of science. 
 has produced a wealth of information on myxomy- cete systematics. .  distribution and ecology. 
 and this has been synthesized into one  of the key publications of recent years. . Hermann Neubert. .  Wolfgang Nowotny. .   Karlheniz Baumann. .  and Heidi Marx (Neubert et al.. 
 1993   1995   2000) produced  a detailed and lavishly illustrated three-volume account of the myxomycetes of  Germany. .  Austria   with references to Switzerland. .  in Die Myxomyceten. 
Among  the younger generation must be mentioned Martin Schnittler. .  based at the Univer- sity of Greiswald. .  who is taking the study of myxomycete ecology to new levels. 
  especially in collaboration with several other workers (Schnittler. .  2000)  Switzerland has a special place in the history of myxomycete ecology as  many of the earliest studies of nivicolous species took place in the Alps and  the Jura. . The Listers visited Arolla in the early part of the 20th century and  collected and described several species (Lister, 1913; Lister and Lister, 1908). .  Although a number of mycologists reported myxomycetes from Switzerland in  the 19th century, the first systematic work was carried out by Charles Meylan,  a schoolteacher from Ste. 
Croix in the Vaud Jura. . Between 1908 and 1937,  he produced a series of papers describing new species from the mountains of  the Jura and the Bernese Oberland (Meylan, 1908, 1935, 1937). . He was well  placed in Ste. 
Croix, which sits below the Chasseron, one of the highest hills  54     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology in the Swiss Jura and associated with rich limestone grassland. . This became  the type locality for many of his taxonomic novelties. . He corresponded with  Gulielma Lister and contributed a paper on Japanese species (Meylan, 1935). 
 His herbarium is housed at the Lausanne Botanical Garden and has been visited  by workers from many countries. . Since 1992, Bruce Ing has collected material  and collated records of the Swiss species. . He has published two lists of cor- ticolous myxomycetes, including such rarities as Paradiacheopsis erythropodia  (Ing, 1997, 1999a). 
The former Czechoslovakia, especially Bohemia, has received some atten- tion. . Celakowsky (Celakovsky, 1893) published a long list, but little was add- ed until Cejp (1962) made several additions and Wichansky (1964) discussed  some rare species. . Current work on the impact of pollution in the forest regions  should prove to be interesting. . An important contribution on Romanian species  was that of Brandza (1928), which included a wealth of ecological data on more  than 170 species. . Later contributions come from Eftimie (1965) and Forstner  (1969, 1971). 
Hungary has been less well served, with the earliest reference   being that of Moesz (1933). . More recently, Toth (1963), Ubrizsy (1967a,b), and  Zeller and Toth (1971) have added additional records of myxomycetes from the  country. . Raciborski (1884) described new species from around Kraków in Poland  and Skupienski (1926) made a number of additions to what was known about  the myxomycetes of this region of Europe. 
Jarocki (1931) was especially inter- ested in montane species from the Carpathian Mountains. .  but it was Krzemie- niewska (1960) who brought together previous knowledge of the Polish species  in her monograph. . Stojanowska (1982) dealt with the species from the Sudetan  region, with more than 100 different species being recorded. . The latest checklist  is that of Drozdowicz et al. 
(2003)  The former USSR was largely neglected in the past, but many of the new  states in Europe, as well as those in Asia, are being actively studied. . Yuri No- vozhilov from St. . Petersburg produced a detailed account of the Russian species  in 1993 (published in Russian) and a more accessible list from the Leningrad  region (Novozhilov. .  1999) as well as a wealth of papers on the more remote  parts of Russia and Asia. 
A long list of Ukrainian species is found in Minter and  Dudka (1996). .  the latter a result of cooperation between the University of Kiev  and the International Mycological Institute under the auspices of the Darwin  Project. 
The myxomycetes were largely collected and identified by Tanya Kri- movaz and Bruce Ing. . The sixth International Congress on the Systematics and  Ecology of Myxomycetes was held in Yalta in 2008, and an international foray  for nivicolous myxomycetes was also held. . A list of myxomycetes from Belarus  was published by Moroz and Novozhilov (1994). . The three Baltic states which border Russia have been quite well studied. 
 Lithuanian species were treated in the first volume of Mycota Lithuaniae by  Mazelaitis and Stanevicˆienė (1995). .  and Gražina Adamonytė is currently com- bining floristics with ecology (e.g.. 
 Adamonytė. .  2005)  Vimba and Adamonytė  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    55 (2003) discussed some Latvian species. . A list of Estonian fungi (Raitvir. 
 1980)  included some 50 species of myxomycetes. .  and Ing (1990) added another 30  species (most of them corticolous). .  while Adamonytė (2000) listed 34 species  from the hitherto understudied south-eastern part of the country. . Northwest Europe has always been very active in mycology, and myxo- mycetes are well studied in the region. 
In Denmark, Raunkiaer produced the  first list in 1888 (Raunkiaer, 1888), and W.T. . Elliott (Elliott, 1926) examined  the Danish material in the University of Copenhagen herbarium. . A monograph  on the Danish species was produced by Bjørnkaer and Klinge (Bjørnekaer and  Klinge, 1964), and Onsberg (1970) added five species to the list. . In 1991, a  foray by the British Mycological Society added several and three more species  were recorded from the Faeroes by Möller (1958). 
R E  Fries published an early list of Swedish myxomycetes in 1899 and  greatly expanded it in 1912 (Fries, 1899, 1912). . Rolf Santesson, who had re- cently added Listerella paradoxa to the country’s records, added a number of  other species in 1964 (Santesson, 1964). 
However, the most important recent  worker is Uno Eliasson, who contributed additional records (Eliasson, 1975;  Eliasson and Sunhede, 1972). . In 1983, Schinner, working in Swedish Lappland,  added 13 more to the Swedish checklist, 8 of which were new records for Scan- dinavia (Schinner, 1983). . Yet more additions came from Eliasson and Gilert  (2007), with 20 species new to Sweden and 9 which are globally rare. . Norway  is less well studied, but an early record was reported by Karlsen (1934), and  Johannesen (1984) added 49 species to the Norwegian checklist. 
Finland has produced several respected workers, and many of their publi- cations are listed in this account. . Prominent among these is Marja Härkönen,  based at the University of Helsinki but active not only in Finland but also in  Africa. 
However, an earlier list of Finnish species was published by Hintikka  (1963). . Härkönen was particularly interested in species of corticolous myxomy- cetes (Härkönen, 1977, 1978), but she covered other species as well and pro- duced a detailed checklist in 1979 (Härkönen, 1979). . Her latest work, Suomen  Limasienet (The Myxomycetes of Finland), is a collaborative work with Elina  Varis (Härkönen and Varis, 2012). . It contains valuable details on the distribu- tion and ecology of myxomycetes and is beautifully illustrated. . Iceland has not been neglected by myxomycologists. 
Rostrup (1903) listed  6 species and Gøtzsche (1984, 1990) increased the total to 46, 3 of which are  nivicolous species. . Trees are sparse on the island, with Betula, Pinus, and Salix  providing the only available substrates for corticolous myxomycetes, but six  species in this group have been reported. . The island of Ireland has a climate well suited to myxomycetes, and both  home-grown and visiting mycologists have recorded their finds. 
Several amateur  naturalists communicated their finds to Gulielma Lister and were encouraged to  publish lists. . The early records were summarized by Adams and Pethybridge  (1910), but the first lists from specialists were by Gunn (1918, 1919, 1920) and  Stelfox (1915). 
A visit to Dublin by Bruce Ing in 1965 led to frequent  collecting  56     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology trips that have continued to the present day. .  and David Mitchell also found   Ireland to be irresistible from the standpoint of collecting myxomycetes. . Roland  McHugh came to live and work in the Dublin area. 
 and the combined efforts of  this trio have produced a healthy catalogue of 224 species (Ing. .  1966; Ing and  McHugh. .  1988   2012; Ing and Mitchell. 
 1980)  STUDIES IN THE UNITED STATES In the United States, the first extensive collections and reports of myxomycetes  were by Schweinitz in the early part of the 19th century. . Schweinitz, who was  mentioned earlier in this chapter, is often considered at the “father” of North  American mycology. . His publication entitled Synopsis Fungorum Carolinae  Superioris (Schweinitz, 1822) represented the first truly significant contribution  to mycology in the United States. . Other early mycologists who collected and  studied myxomycetes to at least some extent were Moses Ashley Curtis (1808– 72). 
 Job Bicknell Ellis (1829–1905). .  Charles Horton Peck (1833–1917). .  An- drew Price Morgan (1836–1907). .  and William Codman Sturgis (1862–1942). 
 Most of their efforts were limited to eastern North America, particularly the  northeastern states. . However   Thomas Nutall (1786–1859). .  an English botanist  who spent more than 30 years in the United States. .  reported three species of  Fuligo and three of Trichia from the south central United States in his paper  “Collections toward a flora of the Territory of Arkansas” (Nuttall. 
 1837)  Later,  Sturgis collected extensively in Colorado. . Sturgis had been born in Boston and  earned three degrees at Harvard University. . However   he became dean of the  School of Forestry at Colorado College in 1904. .  and this provided him with an  opportunity to collect and study myxomycetes in a portion of the United States  where little information was available on these organisms. 
At some point, just  after 1900, Sturgis visited the Listers in England, and he maintained contact  with Gulielma Lister after her father had died. . During his studies of myxomy- cetes, Sturgis also established contact with Robert L. 
Hagelstein (1870–1945),  who became one of the leading authorities on the group in the United States  during the 1920s and 1930s. . As noted earlier, Thomas Macbride and George Martin (Fig. . 2.4) collabo- rated on The Myxomycetes (Macbride and Martin, 1934). 
Several decades lat- er, Martin collaborated with Constantine J. . Alexopoulos (1907–86) (Fig. . 2.5)  to produce their comprehensive world monograph, also entitled The Myxo- mycetes. . The Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) monograph, published by the   University of Iowa Press, is now long out of print. . However, it remains the  single most definitive treatment on the myxomycetes, literally representing a  “bible” for those individuals engaged in studies of these organisms. 
The il- lustrations used in the monograph, which were done by Ruth McVaugh Allen  (1913–84), a gifted and extremely talented artist, are an almost indispensable  resource. . These same illustrations were used in The Genera of Myxomycetes  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    57 FIGURE 2.4 George Martin. . (Courtesy of the University of Iowa Herbarium.) FIGURE 2.5 Constantine Alexopoulos. . (From Transactions of the British Mycological Society. .   1988.) 58     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology (Martin et al.. 
 1983)   an abbreviated version of The Myxomycetes produced by  Marie L. . Farr (b  1927)  During the interval between the publication dates of the two different  works entitled The Myxomycetes. .  Hagelstein published his Mycetozoa of North  America (Hagelstein. .  1944)   which was based largely on collections of myxo- mycetes in the New York Botanical Garden. 
This book   self-published by the  author and not widely distributed worldwide. .  is actually quite  valuable for  the ecological observations that Hagelstein recorded for particular species of  myxomycetes. . Hagelstein had an interesting career. . After graduating from high  school in Brooklyn, Hagelstein joined J. . and D  Lehman Company, a glove  manufacturer located in New York City. 
As such, he did have the scientific  background one typically associates with the individuals who have studied  myxomycetes. . Hagelstein retired as a manager of the company in 1925 and  dedicated himself full-time to his scientific studies. 
His attention was soon cap- tured by the myxomycetes, although at first he studied them concurrently with  the diatoms. . Hagelstein’s first publication on myxomycetes appeared in 1927  (Hagelstein, 1927), and this was followed by a series of other publications on  the group. . He was appointed as honorary curator of myxomycetes at the New  York Botanical Garden in 1930 and held this position until his death in 1945. .  Although best known for the studies he carried out in the northeastern  United  States (particularly Pennsylvania and the Long Island area of New York). .   Hagelstein collected from Canada to Florida. .  as well as in Puerto Rico. 
His  constant collecting partner on many of his trips was Joseph H. . Rispaud, after  whom he named the relatively uncommon Comatricha rispaudii (now known  as Paradiachea rispaudii). . As well as the primarily taxonomic publications of the period. .  one of the  most influential and indeed iconic items to appear was the account by William  Crowder of the myxomycetes of Long Island. .  accompanied by a fine series of  color paintings (Crowder. 
 1926)  This edition of the National Geographic is  now a collectors’ item. . Alexopoulos was unquestionably one of the leading authorities on the  myxomycetes in the United States from late 1950s until his death in 1986. . He  taught at several universities, but his most productive period was when he was  at the University of Texas at Austin. 
Although widely known for myxomycetes,  his research interests also encompassed fungi and his Introductory Mycology  (Alexopoulos, 1952) became the “standard” textbook on the subject. . In 1958, Marie Farr, who was born in Vienna, Austria, but received her  PhD in mycology from the University of Iowa, came to the US National Fun- gus Collections. . Although perhaps best known for her studies of myxomycetes,  she also worked extensively with black mildews and other fungi found in the  tropics. 
Farr’s How to Know the True Slime Molds (Farr. .  1981) represented  one of the first examples of a true field guide to these organisms. 
 and her ear- lier work Flora Neotropica. .  Volume 16: Myxomycetes (Farr. .  1976) remains the  most comprehensive treatment of these organisms for this region of the world. 
 The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    59 Almost 2 decades later. .  Steve Stephenson collaborated with Henry Stempen to  produce Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
 published by Timber Press  in 1994 and currently still in print (Stephenson and Stempen. .  1994)  Other workers studying myxomycetes during the latter part of the 20th cen- tury but not already mentioned include Harold Keller. .  who worked extensive- ly with the corticolous myxomycetes and published a series of papers on this  group (e.g.. .  Keller and Brooks. 
 1977)  He was the first individual to direct his  studies to those species of corticolous myxomycetes that occur in the canopy  of trees (Keller et al., 2004). . Another important individual is Ed Haskins, who  has worked on the developmental aspects of myxomycetes and carried out de- tailed cytological and genetic studies of selected species. . Haskins collaborated  with Jim Clark on several papers (e.g., Clark and Haskins, 2014; Haskins and  Clark, 2016) dealing with various aspects of the biology of myxomycetes. . Dur- ing his career, Clark worked extensively on mating types in myxomycetes and  was able to bring into culture a number of species for the first time. 
Donald  Kowalski at Chico State University in California contributed much of what is  known about the nivicolous myxomycetes associated with snowbanks in alpine  areas of the western United States (e.g.. .  Kowalski   1967   1970)  STUDIES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD The study of myxomycetes worldwide received a tremendous boost in 2003  when a project entitled “Global Biodiversity of Eumycetozoans” was approved  for funding by the National Science Foundation of the United States. 
The proj- ect, based at the University of Arkansas, was directed by Stephenson. . The finan- cial support (>2 million dollars) provided by the National Science Foundation  supported a totally unprecedented effort to survey the eumycetozoans (but with  the myxomycetes representing the primary target group) in regions of the world  (e.g.. 
 Australia. .  Africa   southern South America. .  Central Asia. 
 and Madagas- car) where these organisms were understudied. . These surveys generated more  than 100 papers for publication (the vast majority of which considered myxo- mycetes) in addition to support the graduate training of several students who  earned their PhD degrees studying myxomycetes. . Lado and Wrigley de Basanta (2008) provided a comprehensive review of  the myxomycetes of the Neotropics (defined as including all of North. 
 Central    and South America between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn). .  They indicated that almost half of all described species had been reported from  this region of the world. . However, the number of species recorded from certain  countries varied rather widely. . Mexico, from which 323 species had been re- ported at the time the data in the review were compiled, was the country with  the highest total. . This reflects in large part the efforts of individuals, such as  Arturo Estrada-Torres at the University of Taxcala. 
However, there were no  known records from El Salvador and fewer than 25 species had been reported  for Honduras, the Bahamas, Haiti, Guyana, Paraguay, and Surinam. . In contrast,  60     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology the totals for Brazil and Costa Rica were 206 and 143 species, respectively. . It  should be noted that the total number of species of myxomycetes known from  Costa Rica has since increased to at least 225 (Rojas et al., 2010, 2015). . Mexico  was also represented by the largest number of publications (138) on myxomy- cetes, with Brazil second with 114. . All of these are listed by Lado and Wrigley  de Basanta (2008). 
Since the review referred to earlier appeared. .  there has been a major effort. 
  largely carried out by Carlos Lado. .  Arturo Estrada-Torres. .  and Diana Wrigley  de Basanta. .  to document the myxomycetes of the arid regions of Chile and  Peru. 
This has yielded a series of important papers, including those by Lado  et al. . (2011, 2013, 2014), with others still yet to appear. . These surveys. .  along  with other surveys carried out in the deserts of Mexico. 
 indicated that there is a  distinct ecological group of myxomycetes associated with decaying portions of  succulent plans. .  such as various cacti. 
A major paper on the myxomycetes of the  southernmost portion of South America was published by Wrigley de Basanta  et al. . (2010)  Although most studies (particularly early examples) of myxomycetes took  place in Europe and North America. 
 there have been several other countries  around the world where many individuals have made significant contributions  to our knowledge of this group of organisms. . As will be noted, in many instanc- es, these individuals either sent specimens to and/or collaborated with special- ists on the myxomycetes who resided in either Europe or the United States. 
One  such country is India, which was granted independence from Britain in 1948. . The first collection of a myxomycete in India apparently occurred about  1830, with a few additional records being reported during the remainder of the  19th century (Thind, 1973). 
However, the first serious work on the group was  carried out by a Mrs. . A  Drake, who collected myxomycetes from several dif- ferent regions of India during the period of 1911–27. . Her collections were most- ly identified by Gulielma Lister and were deposited in Kew or the herbarium of  the British Museum. . Drake’s collections represented about 74 different  species. 
 In 1924, 36 of these were reported in a paper by Lister which was entitled Myxo- mycetes from North India (Lister, 1924). . This was the very first  publication on  the myxomycetes of India. 
In 1934, S.A. . Lodhi published a description of Mrs  Blake’s collections (Lodhi, 1934). . Almost 2 decades later, two Indian mycolo- gists, K.S. . Thind (1917–91) in northern India and V. . Agnihothrudu (1930–99)  in southern India, began their studies of myxomycetes. 
These studies, often  carried out in collaboration with their studies, yielded a whole series of papers,  some of which described species new to science. .  During the 1950s, George  Martin worked with Thind and in the 1970s Nannenga-Bremekamp described  several new species from the Indian Himalaya with S.S. . Dhillon (Dhillon and  Nannenga-Bremekamp, 1977, 1978). 
In 1977, Thind’s Myxomycetes of India  was published (Thind, 1977). . In this monograph, 182 species were described  and illustrated, which represented the total known from all of India prior to about  1974. . T N  Lakhanpal began his studies of the myxomycetes of  north-western  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    61 India (primarily around Kulu and Shimla) in 1965 but soon extended his efforts  to other parts of the state of Himachal Pradesh. . Lakhanpal earned his PhD at  the University of Delhi under the direction of R.G. 
Mukerji  Lakhanpal and  Murkerji collaborated on a series of papers that reported new records and an  appreciable number of new species from India. . Their efforts culminated in the  publication of the book Taxonomy of the Indian Myxomycetes (Lakhanpal and  Mukerji, 1981). . Ing reported on some corticolous species from the Mumbai  region in 1981, and the same topic was addressed by Chopra et al. . (1992)  In  1987   Stephenson spent 3 months in India working with Lakhanpal. 
 and this ul- timately led to the publication what is perhaps the first paper to consider global  patterns of biodiversity in myxomycetes (Stephenson et al.. .  1993)  In contrast to India, Pakistan has been far less studied, although it is pos- sible that before partition some Indian reports may refer to what we now know  as Pakistan. . The earliest records are by Lodhi (1934), followed by further ac- counts in 1956, 1960, 1969, and 1970, some of which were coauthored with  other individuals. . Visiting Japanese workers have added considerably to the  number of species recorded from the country (Yamamoto, 1998; Yamamoto  et al., 1992, 1993). 
There appears to be no reports from Bangladesh. . The mountainous country of Nepal has also received some attention. 
Two  early accounts were by J. . Poelt (1965) and S.C. . Singh (1971). 
Visits by Japa- nese workers have added many more species (Hagiwara and Bhandary, 1982;  Nannenga-Bremekamp and Yamamoto, 1988, 1990; Yamamoto and Hagi- wara, 1990). . A visit by Martin Gregory in 1995 yielded the rare corticolous spe- cies Licea atricapillata at high-elevations; he also visited Sikkim in 1997 and  again L. . atricapillata grew in the cultures prepared back in England,  together  with Licea erectoides. 
Sharma and Lakhanpal (1999) reported 75 species from  Bhutan. . The island of Sri Lanka is well known for its biodiversity, but relatively little  is known of the myxomycetes. . The earliest records are by Berkeley and Broome  (1873, 1876) and there are papers by Petch (1909, 1910), but this fascinating  island still needs to be surveyed more completely. . The first reports of myxomy- cetes from Myanmar (Burma) were by Reynolds and Alexopoulos (1971), but  Ko Ko et al. 
(2013) also reported several additional records. . The neighboring  country of Thailand has been better studied, with the same paper by Reynolds  and Alexopoulos listing 42 species, mostly from the lowlands. 
Siwasin and Ing  (1982), Ing et al. . (1987), and Tran et al. 
(2006, 2008) added many additional  species, and a comprehensive checklist of all the species known from the coun- try was provided by Ko Ko et al. . (2010)  There were apparently no records from  Cambodia until the paper published by Ko Ko et al. . (2015), who also reported  the first records from Laos (Ko Ko et al., 2012). . Tran et al. . (2014) published on  the myxomycetes of Vietnam. 
Moving south into Malaya, the few accounts include those of Sanderson  (1922), Lister (1931a), and Emoto (1931c). . Kuthubutheen (1981) included four  species of myxomycetes in an account of fungi from the Langkawi Islands. .  and  62     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology a single species was included in the report of a Kew expedition to Pahang and  Negri Sembilan in 1985 (Oldridge et al.. 
 1986)  It is clear from these papers that  much remains to be done in this biologically diverse country. . Indonesia, despite its significance as an evolutionary hotspot, has not been  well studied in recent years but was an attraction to early workers. . Raciborski  published a list of Javanese species in 1898 (Raciborski. .  1898) and in the same  year Penzig (Penzig. 
 1898) produced a detailed account of 82 species of myxo- mycetes collected in the Botanic Garden at Buitenzorg. .  Java  Emoto (1931a)  added more species to the Java list. . Boedijn (1927) recorded a small number of  myxomycetes from Sumatra and in 1940 added more from the Krakatoa Island  group. . An expedition in 1992 to Brunei Darussalam yielded 26 species, with Erio- nema aureum being the most interesting record (Ing and Spooner, 1998). . Only  three species had been recorded previously from Boneo, all regarded as plant  pathogens. 
The Philippines were visited by D.R. . Reynolds, who listed a large  number of species in 1981 (Reynolds, 1981). . Since 2007, Thomas Edison E. 
dela   Cruz and his students at the University of Santo Tomas have carried out surveys  for myxomycetes in several different regions throughout the country. . In writings from the 9th century attributed to the Chinese scholar Twang  Ching-Shih. .  there is reference to a certain substance kwei hi (literally “demon  droppings”) that is of a pale yellowish color and grows in shady damp condi- tions. 
It is quite possible that this is the earliest known report of a myxomycete  in the literature, and the species involved could have been the common and  conspicuous F. . septica  However   the first definitive records from China (from  what is now the province of Manchuria) were published by Emoto between 1931  and 1938 (Emoto. .  1931b   1933   1934   1938)   and also by Skvortzow (1931). .  However, Shuqun Teng and his wife were the individuals most  responsible for  beginning serious studies of the myxomycetes of China. 
They were most active  during the period between 1932 and 1947. . Buchet (1939) added a few records  from the northern portion of the country, Champion and Mitchell (1980) listed  several species from Hong Kong, and Ing (1987b) added several other records. .  A more comprehensive account of the myxomycetes of Hong Kong species  was provided by Chao-hsuan Chung (1997). 
Since the 1980s. .  Yu Li at Jilin  Agricultural University and some of his students. .  such as Qi Wang. .  Shuanglin  Chen. .  Shuyan Liu. .  Xiaoli Wang. .  and Pu Liu. 
 have carried out studies of the  taxonomy. .  life cycle. .  molecular biology. 
 and biochemistry of myxomycetes  (Liu. .  1980   1981   1982   1983)  Jilin Agricultural University hosted the 8th In- ternational Congress on the Systematics and Ecology of Myxomycetes in 2014. . The island of Formosa, now called Taiwan, attracted students from early  times and the first record of myxomycetes came from Nakazawa (1929, 1931). .  It was half a century before workers from the University of Taipei began a sys- tematic study of the group, including some most interesting work on structural  development. . In terms of floristics and distribution studies, the field was led by  Liu between 1980 and 1983. 
Fimicolous myxomycetes were reported for the  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    63 first time by Chung and Liu (1995). . Little is known about the myxomycetes of  Korea other than those reported in a paper by Nakagawa (1934). . Japan has a long tradition of studies of myxomycetes, which has been sup- ported at the highest level. 
The Listers received material from Japanese workers  and published many papers, the earliest being in 1904 (Lister and Lister, 1904). .  They described several new species, one of which, Hemitrichia imperialis, was  named in honour of Emperor Hirohito (Lister, 1929). . Unfortunately, this was  later synonymized with Arcyria stipata. 
However, a second species (Diderma  imperiale) was subsequently named after the emperor by Emoto in the same  year, with the emperor himself having collected it. . The emperor was a keen  naturalist and an expert on marine invertebrates, and he eventually became an  honorary member of the Linnean Society of London. . He was so interested in  natural history that on the palace grounds in Tokyo there was a laboratory de- voted to the study of myxomycetes, with Yoshikado Emoto as the director. . The  latter has already been mentioned several times as the author of papers on Asian  myxomycetes, and he was a greatly respected scientist. . However, there were  several other contributors before him, notably Kumagusu Minakata, who was  an avid correspondent with the Listers (as was Emoto). . The genus Minakatella  was named for Minakata, and the latter published a number of lists of Japanese  species between 1908 and 1927 (Minakata, 1908, 1927). . Charles Meylan, from  Switzerland, was sent material from Japan in 1935 and published four new vari- eties, only one of which survives today. . Inevitably, there was a long gap caused  by the Second World War, during which little or no activity was possible. 
 However, although Emoto had retired, he was anxious to see a series of paint- ings of Japanese myxomycetes published and this became The Myxomycetes  of Japan (Emoto, 1977). . This sparked the modern age of myxomycology and  mycetozoology in Japan. . Two men have led this resurgence, one ( Hiromitsu   Hagiwara) a professional biologist and the other (Yukinori  Yamamoto) an ama- teur. 
From 1981 to the present they have produced a wide range of publications. .   with  Hagiwara specializing in dictyostelids but also  contributing to delightful  books of beautiful photographs designed to encourage  naturalists to look at  myxomycetes. . Yamamoto has collaborated with several other specialists, no- tably Nannenga-Bremekamp, and has described and distributed exsiccatae of  many new species. 
Two works should be mentioned. .  the first a joint produc- tion of Hagiwara and Yamamoto entitled Myxomycetes of Japan  (Hagiwara and   Yamamoto. .  1995) and Yamamoto’s The Myxomycete Biota of Japan (Yama- moto. .  1998)  Today, Japan has its own Society of Myxomycetology, with a ded- icated journal. . Japan and China rival America and Europe in their  enthusiasm  for myxomycetes! The remainder of Asia has been less well studied until recently. 
The  great expanses of Mongolia have yielded interesting assemblages of myxo- mycetes (Novozhilov and Golubeva, 1986) and there are a few records from   Turkmenistan (Annalieu, 1960). . Reports of myxomycetes from Kazakhstan  have been published by Golovenko (1957, 1960), Glustchenko et al. . (2002)  64     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology published an illustrated book on myxomycetes. . Siberian species were listed by  Lavrov (1926, 1932) and those from the Kamtchatka Peninsula were included  in a report by Transhel (1914). 
The remaining areas of the former USSR were  discussed in the European section given earlier. . Three countries in western Asia have been studied to various degrees. .  Turkey  is another hotspot for biodiversity and has been visited by many  biologists, al- though few mycologists. 
The first records were reported by Gobelez (1963). .  Härkönen and Uotila added many corticolous species in their paper of 1983  (Härkönen and Uotila, 1983), and Härkönen followed this with a number of ad- ditional species in 1988. . Ergul and Gugin (1993) and Ergul and Dülger (2000)  listed even more species, and Ing (2000a) added some corticolous examples. .  Al-Doory (1959) recorded three species from Iraq. . Ramon (1968) produced the  first list from Israel, and this was followed by two contributions from Binyamini  (1986, 1987). 
Twenty species were reported from Saudi Arabia by Yamamoto  and Hagiwara (2003). . The continent of Africa has been much neglected and considering the range  of ecosystems available for study, this needs to be rectified. . The earliest refer- ence to African species is by Durieu (1848), as part of Flore d’Algerie, with  references to many species associated with desert plants. . A full account of the  species known from Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia was given by Maire et al. .  (1926), in which 58 species are recorded, including the description of the niv- icolous Lepidoderma peyerimhoffii. 
The same three countries were covered to  an even greater extent by Faurel et al. . (1965), with 113 species being listed,  including several nivicolous species. . Morocco was the subject of a report by  Rammeloo (1973a), in which more species were added, and additions were also  made to the Tunisian list by Mitchell and Kylin (1984). . Central Africa was the region adopted by mycologists from Belgium. .  which  resulted in the beautifully illustrated series the Flore Illustrée des Champignons  d’Afrique Centrale (e.g.. 
 Rammeloo   1981a   1983) and Buyck (1983a). . Rwanda  was especially studied and yielded six new species in the genera Arcyria, Di- derma, Perichaena, and Trichia (Rammeloo, 1981b; Buyck, 1983b). . West Af- rica has been visited by a number of workers and also by European mycologists  and naturalists working in various areas of agriculture. .  especially in oil palm  plantations. 
 and they have thoughtfully left a record of the myxomycetes they  observed. . The Congo basin was studied in the late 19th century, and some species  were listed by Bresadola and Saccardo (1899). . Rammeloo (1973b) described  Trichia arundinariae (now placed in Metatrichia) from Zaire. . Kranz (1964)  reported Arcyria insignis and Physarum cinereum from Equatorial Guinea,  whereas Lado and Teyssiere (1998) added 40 species, including the rare Phy- sarum plicatum. . Dixon (1959) listed eight species from Ghana, and Härkönen  (1981), working in the Gambia, recorded 22 species which developed in moist  chamber culture, 5 of which were new records for Africa. . Gracia (1986) listed  3 species from the Ivory Coast. 
Farr (1959) worked on the collections made by  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    65 O.F. . Cook in the 1890s in Liberia and listed 45 species, including the descrip- tion of Physarum tesselatum. . The myxomycetes of Nigeria are better known than in many parts of West  Africa. .  partly as a result of the comprehensive account by Farquason and Lister  (1916) of the species found in the southern portion of the country. .  especially  in oil palm plantations and other cultivated areas. 
In 1963, a student expedition  from Imperial College in London brought back many samples, enabling Ing  (1964) to add to the list, including the description of Metatrichia horrida. . A   second expedition in 1966 yielded Arcyria major and the white form of Phy- sarella oblonga, both new to Africa (Ing and McHugh, 1968). . Some myxo- mycetes from Sierra Leone were collected by F.C. 
Deighton when he was a  government plant pathologist in the 1940s. . The material is in Herbarium IMI,  which has now been incorporated into the Kew collections. . Ing (1967) worked  on the collection, which included A. 
stipata and Perichaena pulcherrima, both  new to Africa. . Rammeloo described Hemitrichia rubrobrunnea from Sierra   Leone in 1978 (Rammeloo, 1978b), a species which is morphologically rather  similar to P. 
pulcherrima. . More recently. 
 Angela Ejale of the University of  Benin in Nigeria has produced a number of publications on the myxomycetes  of the country. .  including a comprehensive taxonomic treatment of the species  known from southern Nigeria (Ejale. 
 2011)  East Africa has fared a little better in terms of research on myxomycetes. .  Farquason and Lister (1916) referred to several species as having been found  in East Africa, but no further details are available. . There is circumstantial evi- dence from the presence of some Kenyan specimens at Kew that this was the  source, and these may have been collected in the 1890s. . This is also suggested  by Ebbels (1972, 1973), who collected a few species in Tanzania and Uganda. .  Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) also listed “East Africa” without details, for a  few species. 
Rammeloo and Mitchell (1994) listed myxomycetes from Malawi  and Zambia, including over 50 species, many of them rare. . Almeida (1974b)  listed 13 myxomycetes from Mozambique, at the time a colony of Portugal. .  Ndiritu et al. 
(2009) provided a report of myxomycetes from Kenya. . Tanzania is by far the best studied country in East Africa, if not the entire  continent. . This is largely due to the activities of Marja Härkönen and her col- leagues from Helsinki. 
Between 1980 and 1999, the mycoflora was catalogued,  especially in relation to its importance to the indigenous people. . The emphasis  on myxomycetes was a secondary goal but resulted in a wealth of published data  (Härkönen and Saarimäki, 1991, 1992; Ukkola, 1998a,b,c;  Ukkola et al., 1996). 
 More than 120 species are recorded, including the description of Licea poculi- formis. . The earliest reference to myxomycetes in southern Africa is by Fries (1848)  in his Fungi Natalenses, where a few species are listed from Natal. . This was  followed by Kalchbrenner (1882), who added several species. 
However   the  first attempt at compiling a checklist were those of Duthie (1917. .  1918)   who  recorded some 80 species. .  many of them identified by Gulielma Lister. 
 to whom  66     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology the material had been sent. 
Doidge (1950) listed about 90 species, most of them  repeating Duthie’s records. . The important ecosystems of the Cape area should  be a priority for further research. . Almeida (1973, 1974a) listed 45 species in the  first paper and added 22 in the second. 
The African islands in the Indian Ocean have been little visited. . The atoll  of Aldabra. .  famous for its giant tortoises. .  was studied by a Royal Geographi- cal Society expedition in 1980. 
 and a surprisingly wide range of myxomyce- tes was recorded (Ing and Hnatiuk. .  1981)  Kryvomaz et al. 
(2015) reported  the results of the first survey of an island in the Seychelles as part of a project  that is still ongoing. . Fourteen species were listed from Mauritius by Wiehe  (1948), whereas Adamonyte et al. . (2011) reported on the myxomycetes of  La Réunion Island. . The first report of myxomycetes from Madagascar was  by Patouillard (Patouillard. .  1928)   and little other information was available  until the results of a recent expedition to the island was published by Wrigley  de Basanta et al. . (2013)  The first report of myxomycetes from the continent of Australia was by  Berkeley (1839), who listed two species from Tasmania (then known as Van  Diemen’s Land) which had been collected by R.W. 
Lawrence and Ronald Gunn  and then sent to William Hooker. . The two species—Aethalium septicum (now  known as F. . septica) and Stemonitis fusca—are both relatively common and  form relatively conspicuous fruiting bodies. 
Later, Berkeley (1845) mentioned  eight species (including S. . fusca) identified from specimens collected by James  Drummond in Western Australia and sent to Hooker. . In another early report,  Berkeley (1859) reported 16 species identified from specimens collected by  Ronald Gunn and William Archer in Tasmania during the period of 1839–43. 
 Interestingly. .  two of these (the first described originally as Stemonitis echinula- ta but renamed Lamproderma echinulatum and the second described originally  as Trichia metallica but now known as Prototrichia metallica) were new to sci- ence. . Some years later, Berkeley (1881) also reported nine species of myxomy- cetes from Queensland. 
Cooke added more records in 1888 (Cooke. .  1888a  b)  and McAlpine (1895) listed the known Australian species. .  but there appears to  have been no additional reports during the remainder of the 19th century. . Cheel (1918) added more records and was followed by Cleland (1927) and  Fraser (1933). 
In 1933 Gulielma Lister described Dictydium rutilum but does  appear to have otherwise considered Australian species (Lister, 1933). . Flentje  and Jeffery (1952) reported on species from South Australia, Hnatiuk (1978)  on those from Western Australia, and Cribb (1986) added two species from  Queensland. . As part of the Bicentennial Celebrations, an Anglo–Australian  expedition visited the Kimberley Region of Western Australia in 1988. 
The  myxomycetes were reported by Ing and Spooner (1994) and included some rare  tropical species with disjunct distributions. . There was also a strong similar- ity between the assemblages in limestone areas with similar sites in the Medi- terranean region. . David Mitchell (1995) reviewed all records of Australian  myxomycetes. .  listing 146 species. .  but not including those from the Kimberley  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    67  Expedition. . Thus, the total known from Australia at that time was 150. . This  number was increased to 177 by McHugh et al. 
(2003)  Later Lloyd (2014)  produced an illustrated booklet, entitled Where the Slime Mould Creeps, on the  Tasmanian species. . It is clear from other branches of natural history that there is  much more to be discovered among the myxomycetes of Australia. . New Zealand has enjoyed the attention of both visiting and resident natural- ists, and a full list of previous works is given in Stephenson (2003). 
The earli- est records were those of Berkeley (1855) and Cooke (1879). . Lister and Lister  (1905) also contributed an account of 35 species, including one ( Physarum   dictyospermum) new to science. . Cheesman and Lister (1915) added more  species, and Rawson (1937) provided the first comprehensive list. . The next  such list was produced by Mitchell (1992), with 60 species reported as new to  the country, thus increasing the total known from the country to 155 species. 
  Stephenson (2003) provided the first monographic treatment of the group in  New Zealand in his Myxomycetes of New Zealand. . More than 180 species are  described and illustrated and a full historical background is given. . The island groups in the Pacific Ocean have received little attention in spite  of their rich diversity of habitats. . However   New Caledonia (Huguenin and  Kohler. 
 1969; Lister. .  1922)   the Marshall Islands (Rogers. .  1947)   Cook Islands  (Whitney and Olive. 
 1983)   Fiji and Western Samoa (Kylin and Mitchell. .  1987)    Fiji and Vanuatu (Yamamoto and Matsumoto. .  1992)   and Vanuatu (Yamamoto  and Hagiwara. .  2005) have demonstrated the potential for further work in the  region. . Of special importance are the Galapagos and Hawaiian groups. .  with  their critical role in speciation; valuable studies on their myxomycetes have  been made by Eliasson and Nannenga-Bremekamp (1983) and Eliasson (1991). .   respectively. 
The South Polar region poses difficulties for the biologist. .  but a few expedi- tions have reported on myxomycetes. .  with some species. 
 especially those as- sociated with long-persistent snow packs. .  being the same as those encountered  on mountains in both temperate and tropical regions. 
Horak (1966) described  Diderma antarcticola from material collected on the Antarctic Peninsula, and  Ing and Smith (1980, 1983) recorded a few species from the Antarctic Peninsula  and South Georgia. . The most intensive survey for myxomycetes in any high- latitude region of the Southern Hemisphere was carried out on subantarctic  Macquarie Island by Stephenson in 1995 (Stephenson et al., 2007). . The results  of this survey and surveys of subantarctic Campbell Island and the Auckland  Islands were provided by Stephenson (2011a). . FUTURE STUDIES OF MYXOMYCETES The account provided herein has necessarily concentrated on the history of col- lecting and recording myxomycetes around the world. 
 and this was the major  activity until the second half of the 20th century. . In the early days. 
 considerable  attention was also directed to the structure and life cycle of myxomycetes. .  and  68     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology toward the end of the 19th century. 
 this was extended to physiology. . As bio- logical science progressed in the second half of the 20th century. .  the physiol- ogy. .  biochemistry and genetics of myxomycetes began to attract experimental  biologists (e.g.. 
 Alexopoulos. .  1953; Hawker. .  1952; Sobels. 
 1950)  A valuable  overview was provided by Gray and Alexopoulos (1968) with their Biology of  the Myxomycetes. . Another useful introduction was that of Ashworth and Dee  (1975), which placed some emphasis on genetics. . The field of biosystemat- ics was highlighted by the review by O’Neil Ray Collins (1979) and this was  followed by years of dedicated research by Jim Clark and his students at the  University of Kentucky. 
Clark’s experience in disentangling morphospecies  and biological species has led to some powerful discussions at international  meetings and is well reviewed in his paper of 2000. . A more recent review of  the species concept in myxomycetes was provided by Walker and Stephenson  (2016). .  whereas the progress that has been made in the studies of myxomycetes  since the publication of the Martin and Alexopoulos monograph was described  by Stephenson (2011b). 
During this same period. .  some heavyweight publications were produced. .   such as those by Dove and Rusch (1980) on the growth and differentiation of  Physarum polycephalum in the laboratory and the highly influential two-vol- ume Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium by Aldrich and Daniel (1982). 
 In the 21st century we have seen the rise of molecular taxonomy. .  which to date  has largely reinforced our traditional system of classification. .  but we cannot  be complacent! We have entered a bizarre period in which myxomycetes are  being used to design transport systems. 
 operate computers and even play the  piano (e.g.. .  Adamatzky. 
 2010)  All of these disciplines will be examined in later  chapters. . However   as is the case for all experimental biology. .  repeatability of  experimentation must be based on a sound knowledge of precisely which organ- ism is actually being studied! REFERENCES Adamatzky. 
 A    2010  Physarum Machines: Computers from Slime MouldWorld Scientific,   Singapore. .  Adamonytė, G., 2000. 
New data on Estonian myxomycete biota. . Folia Cryptog. . Estonica 36, 7–9. .  Adamonytė, G., 2005. . Slime molds on Heracleum sosnowskii in Lithuania. 
Mikol  Fitopatol  39,  1–5   Adamonyte, G., Stephenson, S.L., Michaud, A., Seraoui, E.H., Meyer, M., Novozhilov, Y.K.,   Krivomaz, T.I., 2011. . Myxomycete species diversity on the island of La Réunion (Indian  Ocean). . Nova Hedwigia 92, 523–549. .  Adams, J., Pethybridge, G.H., 1910. . A census catalogue of Irish fungi. 
Proc  R  Ir  Acad  B 28,  120–166. .  Ainsworth, G.C., Balfour-Browne, F.L., 1960. . Gulielma Lister centenary. 
Nature 188, 362–363. .  Albertini, J.B., Schweinitz, L.D. . von., 1805. . Conspectus Fungorum in Lusatiae Superioris. 
 Kummer,  Leipzig. .  Al-Doory, Y., 1959. . Myxomycetes from Iraq. . Mycologia 51, 299–300. .  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    69 Aldrich, H.C., Daniel, J.W., 1982. . Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium. 
Academic Press, New  York, NY. .  Alexopoulos, C.J., 1952. . Introductory Mycology. 
Wiley, New York. .  Alexopoulos, C.J., 1953. . Myxomycetes developed in moist chamber culture on bark from living  Florida trees, with notes on an undescribed species of Comatricha. 
Q  J  Florida Acad. . Sci  16,  254–262. .  Almeida, M.G., 1973. . Contribução para o conhecimento dos myxomycetes de Angola I. 
Bol  Soc   Brot  47, 277–297. .  Almeida, M.G., 1974a. . Contribução para o conhecimento dos myxomycetes de Angola II. 
Bol  Soc   Brot  48, 187–203. .  Almeida, M.G., 1974b. . Contribução para o conhecimento dos myxomycetes de Moçambique. 
Bol   Soc  Brot  48, 205–210. .  Annalieu, S.A., 1960. 
New data on the mycoflora of Turkmenia. . Izvestia Akademie Nank Turkmen  S. 
S  R  Biological Sciences 1960, 25–34. .  Ashworth, J.M., Dee, J., 1975. 
The Biology of Slime Moulds. . Edward Arnold Ltd., London. .  Batsch, J.G.C., 1783. 
Elenchus fungorum. . Halle  Beltrán Tejera, E., 2001. 
Fungi  In: Izquierdo, I., Martín, J.L., Zurita, N., Arechavaleta, M. . (Eds.),  Lista de especies silvestres de Canarias (hongos, plantas y animales terrestres). . Consejería de  Política Territorial y Medio Ambiente del Gobierno de Canarias, La Laguna, pp. 
29–62  Berkeley, M.J., 1836. . British fungi. 
In: Smith, J.E. . (Ed.), The English Flora 2. . London  Berkeley, M.J., 1839. 
Notices on British fungi. . Ann  Mag  Nat  History 1, 198–208. .  Berkeley, M.J., 1845. 
Decades of fungi. . Decades III–VII. 
Australian fungi. . London J  Bot  4, 42–56,  298–315. .  Berkeley, M.J., 1855. 
Fungi  In: Hooker, J.D. . (Ed.), The Botany of the Antarctic Voyage 2. . Flora  Novae-Zelandiae Pt. 
2, pp  172–210  Berkeley, M.J., 1859. . Fungi  In: Hooker, J.D. . (Ed.), Flora of Australia 2. . The Botany of the  Antarctic  Voyage of H. . M  Discovery Ships Erebus and Terror, in the Years 1839–43. 
Flora Tasmaniae, Vol. .  II  Monocotyledones and Acotyledones. 
Novell Reeve, London. . ( Myxomycetes, pp. . 266–269) Berkeley, M.J., 1881. . Australian fungi II. 
J  Linn  Soc  London Bot. . 18, 383–389. .  Berkeley, M.J., Broome, C.E., 1873. . Enumeration of the fungi of Ceylon. 
J  Linn  Soc  London Bot. .  14, 29–140. 
 Berkeley, M.J., Broome, C.E., 1876. . Supplement to the enumeration of the fungi of Ceylon. 
J  Linn   Soc  London Bot. . 15, 82–86   Binyamini, N., 1986. . Myxomycetes from Israel I. . Nova Hedwigia 42, 379–386. .  Binyamini, N., 1987. . Myxomycetes from Israel II. 
Nova Hedwigia 44, 351–364. .  Bjørnekaer, K., Klinge, A.B., 1964. . Die Danischen Schleimpilze. 
Friesia 7, 149–280. .  Boedijn, K.B., 1927. 
Mycetozoa von Sumatra. . Miscellania Zoolog. 
Sumatra 24, 1–4. .  Brandza, M., 1928. . Les Myxomycètes de Neamtz (Moldavie.). 
Bull  Soc  Myc  Fr  44, 249–300. .  Bresadola, J., Saccardo, P.A., 1899. . Fungi congoenses. . Bull  Soc  Roy  Belg  38, 163   Briffa, M., 1998. 
First checklist of the myxomycetes of Malta. . Xjenza 2, 28–34. .  Briffa, M., Moreno, G., Illana, C., 2000. 
Some rare myxomycetes from Malta. . Stapfia 73, 151–158. .  Buchet, T.S., 1939. . Contribution à la flore mycologique de la Chine septentrionale 1. 
Bull  Soc   Myc  France 55, 220–225. .  Bulliard, J.B., 1791. . Histoire des champignons de la France. . Paris  Buyck, B., 1983a. 
Flore illustrée des champignons d’Afrique Centrale. . Fasc 11  Diderma  Meise,  Belgium. . Buyck, B., 1983b. . Diderma petaloides Buyck, a new myxomycete species from Rwanda. 
Bull   Jardin Bot. . Natl  Belg  53, 293   70     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Cejp, K., 1962. . A contribution to the mycoflora of slime fungi (Myxomycetes) in Bohemia, espe- cially in West Bohemia. 
Acta Musei Nationalis Prague 18B, 61–80. .  Celakovsky, L., 1893. 
Die Myxomyceten Böhmens. . Arkiven Natur Lands Böhmens 7, 1–88. .  Champion, C.L., Mitchell, D.W., 1980. 
Some myxomycetes collected in Hong Kong. . Bull  Brit   Mycol  Soc  14, 135–137. .  Cheel, E.C., 1918. 
Notes on Australian Myxies (Mycetozoa, Myxomycetes). . The Australian   Naturalist 4, pp. . 6-12  Cheesman, W.N., Lister, G., 1915. . Mycetozoa of Australia and New Zealand. 
London J  Bot  53,  203–212. .  Chopra, R.K., Nannenga-Bremelamp, N.E., Lakhanpal, T.N., 1992. 
Some new taxa of corticolous  myxomycetes from the N.W. . Himalayas, India and a note on Cribraria from Japan. 
Proc  K   Ned  Akad  Wetensc  95, 41–50   Chung, C., 1997. . Slime Moulds of Hong Kong. . Yi Jsien Publishing Co., Taipei. .  Chung, C., Liu, C., 1995. 
First report of fimicolous myxomycetes from Taiwan. . Fungal Sci. 
10,  33–35. .  Cienkowsky, L., 1863. . Das Plasmodium. . Pringsheim Jahrbücher 3, 400–411. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2014. 
Sporophore morphology and development in the myxomycetes: a  review. . Mycosphere 5, 153–170. .  Cleland, J.B., 1927. 
Notes on a collection of Australian myxomycetes. . Transactions of the Royal  Society of South Australia 51, pp. . 62–64  Cochet, S., 1977. 
Les myxomycetes de France. . Bull  Soc  Myc  Fr  93, 159–200. .  Cochet, S., Bozonnet, J., 1980. 
Les myxomycetes de France: nouveautés et complements. . Bull  Soc   Myc  Fr  96, 115–120. .  Cochet, S., Bozonnet, J., 1984. 
Les myxomycetes de France: nouveautés et complements. . Bull  Soc   Myc  Fr  100, 39–64. .  Collins, O.R., 1979. . Myxomycete biosystematics: some recent developments and future research  opportunities. 
Bot  Rev  45, 145–201. .  Cooke, M.C., 1877. . The Myxomycetes of Great Britain. 
Williams and Norgate, London. .  Cooke, M.C., 1879. . New Zealand fungi. 
Grevillea 8, 54–68. .  Cooke, M.C., 1888a. . Australian fungi. 
Grevillea 16, 72–76. .  Cooke, M.C., 1888b. . Australian fungi. 
Grevillea 17, 7–8. .  Cribb, A.B., 1986. 
Two slime fungi new to Queensland from Krombit Tops. . Queensland Nat. 
27,  22–23. .  Crowder, W., 1926. 
Marvels of mycetozoa. . Natl  Geogr  Mag  49, 421–443. .  Dallimore, W., Jackson, A.B., 1923. 
A Handbook of Coniferae, Including Ginkgoaceae. . Edward  Arnold, London. .  de Bary, A., 1859. 
Die Mycetozoen. . Zeitschrift fur wissenschaftwehe Zoologie 10, pp. . 88–175  de Bary, A., 1884. . The Comparative Morphology and Biology of the Fungi, Mycetozoa and Bacte- ria. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, English translation, 1887. .  de Tournefort, J.P., 1700. 
Institutiones rei Herbariae. . Parisiis, E Typographia Regia. . France  Dhillon, S.S., Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1977. . Notes on some myxomycetes from the north- western part of the Himalaya. 
Proc  K  Ned  Akad  Wetensc  C 80, 257–266. .  Dhillon, S.S., Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1978. . Notes on some myxomycetes from the north- western part of the Himalaya. 
Proc  K  Ned  Akad  Wetensc  C 81, 141–149. .  Ditmar, L.P.F., 1813. . Die Pilze Deutschlands, In: Sturm, J. . (Ed.), Deutschlands Flora. . in Abbildun- gen nach der Natur mit Beschreibungen, 2, pp.55–56. . Dixon, J., 1785. 
Fasciculus cryptogrammaticae Britannicae. . London  The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    71 Dixon, P.A., 1959. . Myxomycetes of Ghana: 1: Stemonitis and Comatricha. 
J  W  Afr  Sci  Assoc   5, 101–104. .  Doidge, E.M., 1950. 
The South African fungi and lichens. . Bothalia 5, 1–1094. .  Dove, W.F., Rusch, H.P., 1980. 
Growth and Differentiation in Physarum polycephalum. . Princeton  University Press, Princeton, NJ. .  Drozdowicz, A., Ronikier, A., Stojanowska, W., Panek, E., 2003. 
Myxomycetes of Poland: a check- list. . Krytyczna lista śluzowców Polski, 10. 
Durieu, M.C., 1848. . Flore d’Algerie. . Explor  Sci  Bot  Algerienne 1, 400–423. .  Duthie, A.V., 1917. . African myxomycetes. 
Trans  R  Soc  S  Afr  6, 297–310. .  Duthie, A.V., 1918. 
South African myxomycetes. . S  Afr  J  Sci  15, 456–460. .  Ebbels, D.B., 1972. 
Additions to the mycoflora of south-west Uganda. . J  E  Afr  Nat  Hist  Soc   133, 1–6   Ebbels, D.B., 1973. . Myxomycetes in East Africa. 
Bull  E  Afr  Nat  Hist  Soc  1973, 14–18. .  Eftimie, E., 1965. 
Contributu la cunoastreen myxomyceteen di Romania. . Anali Stiint. . Univ  Cuza  Ser  2, 355–358, 11. .  Ehrenberg, C.G., 1818. . Fungorum nova genera. 
Jahrbüche die Gewachskunde, Berlin. . Ejale, A., 2011. . Myxomycetes from Southern Nigeria. 
Lambert Academic Publishing, Saarbrücken. .  Eliasson, U., 1975. 
Myxomycetes in the nature reserve of the Gothenburg Botanical Garden. . Svensk  Bot. . Tidskrift 69, 105–112. .  Eliasson, U., 1991. 
The myxomycete biota of the Hawaiian Islands. . Mycol  Res  95, 257–267. .  Eliasson, U., Gilert, E., 2007. . Additions to the Swedish myxomycete biota. 
Karstenia 47, 29–36. .  Eliasson, U., Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1983. . Myxomycetes of the Scalesia forest, Galapagos  Islands. 
Proc  K  Ned  Akad  Wetensc  C 86, 143–153. .  Eliasson, U., Sunhede, S., 1972. . Some Swedish records of myxomycetes. 
Svensk Bot. . Tidskrift  66, 18–24. .  Elliott, W.T., 1926. 
Danish myxomycetes contained in the Botanical Museum of the University of  Copenhagen. . Bot  Tidsskrift 39, 357–367. .  Emoto, Y., 1931a. 
Javanische Myxomyceten. . Bull  Buitenzorg Bot. 
Garden III 11, 161–164. .  Emoto, Y., 1931b. . Die Myxomyceten der Südmanschurien. 
Bot  Mag  Tokyo 45, 229–234. .  Emoto, Y., 1931c. 
The Malayan myxomycetes. . London J  Bot  69, 38–42   Emoto, Y., 1933. . Die Myxomyceten der Südmanschurien 2. 
Bot  Mag  Tokyo 47, 200–202. .  Emoto, Y., 1934. 
On the Manchurian myxomycetes. . Trans  Nat  Hist  Soc  Manchuria 4, 7–12. .  Emoto, Y., 1938. 
Myxomycetes in Manchuria. . Proc  Jap  Assoc  Adv  Sci  13, 63–69   Emoto, Y., 1977. . The Myxomycetes of Japan. . Sangyo Tosho Publishing Co., Tokyo. .  Ergul, G., Dülger, B., 2000. . Myxomycetes of Turkey. 
Karstenia 40, 189–194. .  Ergul, C., Gugin, F., 1993. 
Turkye icni yen ihi myxomycetes tatescu. . Turk  J  Bot  17, 267–271. .  Famintsin, A., Woronin, M.S., 1873. 
Über zwei neue Formen von Schleimpilzen. . Mem  Acad  St   Petersburg VII 20, 1–16. .  Farquason, C.O., Lister, G., 1916. 
Notes on South Nigerian mycetozoa. . London J  Bot  54, 121–133. .  Farr, M.L., 1959. . O  F  Cook’s myxomycete collection from Liberia and the Canary Islands. 
 Lloydia  22, 295–301. .  Farr, M.L., 1976. 
Flora Neotropica. . Monograph No. . 16  Myxomycetes. . The New York Botanical  Garden, New York. 
Farr, M.L., 1981. . How to Know the True Slime Molds. 
McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math,  Dubuque. .  Faurel, L., Feldman, J., Schotter, G., 1965. 
Catalogue des myxomycètes de l’Afrique du Nord. . Bull   Soc  Hist  Nat  Afrique N  55, 7–39   72     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Feest, A., Burggraaf, Y., 1991. . A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes, English translation of Nannen- ga-Bremekamp, N.E., De Nederlandse Myxomyceten. 
Bio Press Ltd., Bristol. .  Flentje, N.T., Jeffery, M.W., 1952. 
A note on some slime moulds from South Australia. . J  S  Aust   Dept  Agric  55, 297–300. .  Forstner, S., 1969. . Second contribution to the study of myxomycetes in Rumania; Third. 
Communle  Bot. . 9, 77–88   Forstner, S., 1971. . Second contribution to the study of myxomycetes in Rumania; Third. 
Communle  Bot. . 12, 211–220. .  Fraser, L., 1933. . The mycetozoa of New South Wales. . Proc  Linn  Soc  NSW 58, 431–436. .  Fries, E.M., 1829. 
Systema mycologicum. . Upsala, Sweden. . Fries, E.M., 1848. . Fungi Natalenses. 
Stockholm, Sweden. . Fries, R.E., 1899. . Sveriges myxomyceter. . K  Vetensk  Akad  Förh  Ofaren 56, 215–246. .  Fries, R.E., 1912. 
Den svenska myxomycet-floran. . Svensk Bot. 
Tidskrift 6, 721–802. .  Glustchenko, V.I., Leontyev, D.V., Akulov, A.Y., 2002. 
The slime moulds. . Kharkov  Gobelez, M., 1963. 
The mycoflora of Turkey. . Mycopathologia 19, 296–314. .  Golovenko, I.N., 1957. 
Myxomycetes on Tienshan Fir. . Urchen  Zap  Kazakh Univ. . 29, 95–106. .  Golovenko, I.N., 1960. . K flore Mikromitsetov Kazakhstana. . Frunze Izvestdata Akademie Kirghiz  S.S.R., 122–139. . Gottsberger, G., 1966. 
Die Myxomyceten der Steiermark. . Nova Hedwigia 12, 203–296. .  Gøtzsche, H.F., 1984. . Contributions to the myxomycete flora of Iceland. 
Acta Bot  Islandica 7,  15–26. .  Gøtzsche, H.F., 1990. 
Notes on Icelandic myxomycetes. . Acta Bot  Islandica 10, 3–21. .  Gracia, E., 1986. 
Tres mixomicetes de la Costa d’Ivori. . Folia Bot  Miscellanica 5, 141–147. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of the Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press Co., New York, NY. .  Gunn, W.F., 1918. 
Irish myxomycetes. . Ir  Nat  J  27, 174   Gunn, W.F., 1919. . Irish myxomycetes. . Ir  Nat  J  28, 45–48   Gunn, W.F., 1920. 
Irish myxomycetes. . Ir  Nat  J  29, 76   Haan, M  de, 1996  Twee nieuwe Myxomyceten voor Belgie. 
Steerbeckia 17, 7–10. .  Hagelstein, R., 1927. 
Mycetozoa from Puerto Rico. . Mycologia 19, 35–37. .  Hagelstein, R., 1944. 
The Mycetozoa of North America: Based Upon the Speciments in the Her- barium of the New York Botanical Garden. . Hafner Publishing Co., New York, NY. .  Hagiwara, H., Bhandary, H.R., 1982. . Myxomycetes from Central Nepal I. 
In: Otani, Y. . (Ed.), Re- ports on the Cryptogamic Study in Nepal. . Miscellaneous Publication of the National Science  Museum, Tokyo, pp. . 119–124   Hagiwara, H., Yamamoto, Y., 1995. 
Myxomycetes of Japan. . Heibonsha, Tokyo. 
Hanbury, F.J., 1889–1898. . An Illustrated Monograph of the British Hieracia. . The Author, London. . Härkönen, M., 1977. . Corticolous myxomycetes in three different habitats in southern Finland. 
 Karstenia 17, 19–32. .  Härkönen, M., 1978. 
On corticolous myxomycetes in northern Finland and Norway. . Ann  Bot   Fennici 15, 32–37. .  Härkönen, M., 1979. . A checklist of Finnish myxomycetes. 
Karstenia 19, 8–18. .  Härkönen, M., 1981. . Gambian myxomycetes developed in moist chamber culture. 
Karstenia 21,  21–25. .  Härkönen, M., Saarimäki, T., 1991. . Tanzanian myxomycetes; first survey. 
Karstenia 31, 31–54. .  Härkönen, M., Saarimäki, T., 1992. . Tanzanian myxomycetes; first survey (addition). 
Karstenia 32, 6. .  Härkönen, M., Uotila, P., 1983. . Turkish myxomycetes developed in moist chamber culture. 
 Karstenia 23, 1–9. .  Härkönen, M., Varis, E., 2012. . Suomen limasienet. . Luonnontieteellinen keskusmuseo, Helsinki. 
The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    73 Haskins, E.F., Clark, J., 2016. . A guide to the biology and taxonomy of the Echinosteliales. 
Myco- sphere 7, 473–491. .  Hawker, L.E., 1952. 
The physiology of myxomycetes. . The Lister Memorial Lecture. . Trans  Brit   Mycol  Soc  35, 177–187. .  Hill, J., 1751. . A History of Plants. 
Thomas Osborne, London. .  Hinkova, T., 1951. 
On Bulgarian myxomycetes. . Bull  Bot  Inst  Sofia 2, 265–268. .  Hinkova, T.S., Draganov, S., 1965. . On Bulgarian myxomycetes. 
God  Sofia Univ. . Biol  Faculty 58,  163–167. .  Hintikka, V., 1963. 
Notes on Finnish myxomycetes. . Karstenia 6–7, 110. .  Hnatiuk, R.J., 1978. 
Records of myxomycetes in Western Australia. . W  Aust  Herbarium Res. . Notes  1, 17–18. .  Horak, E., 1966. 
Sobre dos nuevas especies de hongos recolectadas en el Antárctico. . Contrib    Antarctic Inst. . Argentina 104, 1–13. 
 Howard, H.J., 1948. . The mycetozoa of sand-dunes and marshland. 
Southeast Nat. . 5, 26–30   Huguenin, B., Kohler, F., 1969. 
Qulelques myxomycètes de Nouvelle-Caledonie. . Bull  Soc  Myc   Fr  85, 381–384. .  Ing, B., 1964. 
Myxomycetes from Nigeria. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  47, 49–55   Ing, B., 1966. . New Irish myxomycetes. 
Ir  Nat  J  15, 225–226. .  Ing, B., 1967. 
Myxomycetes from Sierra Leone. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  50, 549–553. .  Ing, B., 1968. 
A Census Catalogue of British Myxomycetes. . The Foray Committee of the British  Mycological Society, London. .  Ing, B., 1980. 
A revised census catalogue of British myxomycetes. . Bull  Brit  Mycol  Soc  14,  97–111. .  Ing, B., 1985. 
A revised census catalogue of British myxomycetes. . Bull  Brit  Mycol  Soc  19,  109–115. .  Ing, B., 1987a. 
Corticolous myxomycetes from Cyprus. . Mycotaxon 30, 195. .  Ing, B., 1987b. 
Myxomycetes from Hong Kong and southern China. . Mycotaxon 30, 199–201. .  Ing, B., 1990. 
New records of myxomycetes in Estonia. . Proc  Estonian Acad. 
Sci  Biol  39, 271–276. .  Ing, B., 1994. . Tansley Review No. 
62  The phytosociology of myxomycetes. . New Phytol. 
126,  175–201. .  Ing, B., 1997. 
Corticolous myxomycetes from Switzerland 1. . Mycol  Helvetica 9, 3–19. .  Ing, B., 1999a. 
Corticolous myxomycetes from Switzerland 2. . Mycol  Helvetica 10, 25–40. .  Ing, B., 1999b. 
The Myxomycetes of Britain and Ireland: An Identification Handbook. . Richmond  Publishing Co., Slough. .  Ing, B., 2000a. . Corticolous myxomycetes from Turkey. 
Karstenia 40, 63–64. .  Ing, B., 2000b. 
A Census Catalogue of the Myxomycetes of Great Britain and Ireland, second ed. .  Miscellaneous Publication of the British Mycological Society, Kew. . Ing, B., 2003. 
The myxomycetes of Alto Adige—Trentino. . Il Micologo. . Cunino 13, 22–30. .  Ing, B., Hnatiuk, R.J., 1981. 
Myxomycetes of Aldabra Atoll. . Atoll Res  Bull  249, 1–10   Ing, B., Ivancevic, B., 2000. . A checklist of myxomycetes from former Yugoslavia. 
Stapfia 73,  135–150. .  Ing, B., McHugh, R., 1968. 
Myxomycetes from Nigeria II. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  51, 215–220. .  Ing, B., McHugh, R., 1988. . A revision of Irish myxomycetes. 
Proc  R  Ir  Acad  B 88, 99–117. .  Ing, B., McHugh, R., 2012. . A second revision of Irish myxomycetes. 
Proc  R  Ir  Acad  B 112, 1–20. .  Ing, B., Mitchell, D.W., 1980. . Irish myxomycetes. 
Proc  R  Ir  Acad  B 80, 277–304. .  Ing, B., Siwasin, J., Samaranpan, J., 1987. 
Myxomycetes from Thailand II. . Mycotaxon 30, 197. .  Ing, B., Smith, R.I.L., 1980. 
Two myxomycetes from South Georgia. . Brit  Antarctic Survey Bull. .  50, 118–120. 
 74     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Ing, B., Smith, R.I.L., 1983. . Further myxomycete records from South Georgia and the Antarctic  Peninsula. . Brit  Antarctic Survey Bull. . 59, 80–81   Ing, B., Spooner, B.M., 1994. . Myxomycetes from the Kimberley Region, Western Australia. 
Bot   J  Linn  Soc  116, 71–76. .  Ing, B., Spooner, B.M., 1998. . Myxomycetes from Brunei Darussalam. 
Kew Bull  53, 829–834. .  Jarocki, J., 1931. 
Mycetozoa from the Czarnohora Mountains in the Polish eastern Carpathians. .  Bull  Acad  Polonica B 11, 447–464. .  Johannesen, E.W., 1984. . New and interesting myxomycetes from Norway. 
Nordic J  Bot  4, 513–520. .  Kalchbrenner, K., 1882. . Fungi Macowaniani. 
Grevillea 10, 143–147. .  Karlsen, A., 1934. 
Studies on myxomycetes I: new records for Norway. . Bergens Museum Årbok,  Naturvidensk rekke 1, 1–8. .  Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1977. 
Corticolous myxomycetes VII: contributions towards a mono- graph of Licea, five new species. . Mycologia 69, 667–684. .  Keller, H.W., Skrabal, M., Eliasson, U.H., Gaither, T.W., 2004. 
Tree canopy biodiversity in the  Great Smoky Mountains National Park: ecological and developmental observations of a new  species of Diachea. . Mycologia 96, 537–547. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Hanh, T.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Mitchell, D.W., Rojas, C., Hyde, K.D., Lumyong, S.,  Bahkali, A.H., 2010. . Myxomycetes of Thailand. 
Sydowia 62, 243–260. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Ko Ko, Z.Z.W., Rosing, W.C., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. . Myxomycetes from Myanmar. 
 Sydowia 65, 267–276. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Rosing, W.C., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. . First records of myxomycetes from Cambodia. 
 Österreichische Zeitschrift für Pilzkunde 24, 31–37. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Tran, H.T.M., Clayton, M.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2012. . First records of myxomycetes  from Laos. 
Nova Hedwigia 96, 73–81. .  Kowalski, D.T., 1967. 
Observations on the Dianemaceae. . Mycologia 59, 1075–1084. .  Kowalski, D.T., 1970. 
The species of Lamproderma. . Mycologia 62, 621–672. .  Kranz, J., 1964. 
Fungi collected in the Republic of Guinea I. . Sydowia 17, 132–138. .  Kryvomaz, T., Michaud, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
First survey for myxomycetes on Mahe Island  in the Seychelles. . Nova Hedwigia 102, 3–4. .  Krzemieniewska, H. . 1960  Sluzowce Polski na tle sluzowców europejskich. . PWN, Warsaw. 
Kuthubutheen, A.J., 1981. . Notes on the macrofungi of Langkawi. . Malayan Nat. 
J  34, 123–130. .  Kylin, J.H., Mitchell, D.W., 1987. 
Contribution to the myxomycete flora of Fiji and Western Samoa. .  Nova Hedwigia 45, 375–381. .  Lado, C., 1994. 
A checklist of myxomycetes in Mediterranean countries. . Mycotaxon 52, 117–185. .  Lado, C., 2001. 
Nomenmyx  Cuadernos de Trabajo de Flora micológica Ibérica 16. . Editorial CSIC,  Madrid. .  Lado, C., Pando, F., 1997. 
Myxomycetes I: ceratiomyxales, echinosteliales, liceales, trichiales. .  Flora Mycol. . Iberica 2, 1–323. .  Lado, C., Siquier, J.S., 2014. 
Myxomycetes de las Islas Baleares. . Real Jardin Botánico CSIC, Madrid. .  Lado, C., Teyssiere, M., 1998. . Myxomycetes from Equatorial Guinea. 
Nova Hedwigia 67, 421–441. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. . A review of Neotropical Myxomycetes (1828–2008). 
Ana- les Jard. . Bot  Madrid 65, 211–254. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., 2011. . Biodiversity of Myxomycetes from the  Monte Desert of Argentina. 
Anales Jard. . Bot  Madrid 68, 61–95. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., García-Carvajal, E., 2014. . Myxomycete diversi- ty of the Patagonian Steppe and bordering areas in Argentina. 
Anales Jard. . Bot  Madrid 71, 1–35. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
The biodiversity of  myxomycetes in central Chile. . Fungal Divers. . 59, 3–32   The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    75 Lakhanpal, T.N., Mukerji, K.G., 1981. . Taxonomy of the Indian myxomycetes. . Bibliotheca Mycol. 
 78, 1–531. .  Lavrov, N.N., 1926. . Material k mikoflore nizov’ev reki Eniseya i ostrovov Eniseiskogo zaliva (data  on the Mycoflora of the lower reaches of the Enisei River and Islands of Enisei Bay). . Izvestiya  Tomskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta, 76 (2), 158-177. . Lavrov, N.N., 1932. 
Opredelitel’ rastitel’nykh parazitov kul’turnykh i dikoras- tushchikh poleznykh  rastenii Sibiri. . Vypusk I  Polevye, ogorodnye, bakhchevye i tekhnicheskie kul’tury (key to  parasites of cultivated and useful wild plants of Siberia. . Part I  Field, Melon Field, Garden and  Industrial Crops). 
Tomsk, Russia. . Link, J.H.F., 1809. . Observationes in ordines plantarum naturales. 
Magazin der Gesellschaft natur- forschenden Freundes zu Berlin iii, 3–42. . Linnaeus, C., 1763. . Systema plantarum, ed. . 2, vol  2  Holmiae  Lister, A., 1888. . Notes on the plasmodium of Badhamia utricularis and Brefeldia maxima. 
Ann   Bot  2 (5), 1–23. .  Lister, A., 1894. . Monograph of the Mycetozoa. 
British Museum, London. .  Lister, G., 1913. . Notes on Swiss mycetozoa, 1912. 
London J  Bot  51, 95–109. .  Lister, G., 1917. . Two new British species of Comatricha. 
London J  Bot  55, 121–123. .  Lister, G., 1918. 
The mycetozoa: a short history of their study in Britain; an account of their habitats  generally, and a list of species recorded from Essex. . Essex Field Club Special Memoir 6. . London  Lister, G., 1922. . Mycetozoa from New Caledonia. . Bot  J  Linn  Soc  46, 94–96   Lister, G., 1924. 
Mycetozoa from North India. . London J  Bot  62, 16–20   Lister, G., 1925. . Monograph of the Mycetozoa, third ed. 
British Museum, London. .  Lister, G., 1929. 
A new species of Hemitrichia from Japan. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  14, 225–227. .  Lister, G., 1931a. 
Notes on Malayan mycetozoa. . London J  Bot  69, 42–43   Lister, G., 1933. . A new species of Dictydium from Australia. 
London J  Bot   Lister, G., 1938. . The Rev  William Cran and his scientific work. 
London J  Bot  76, 319–327. .  Lister, A., Lister, G., 1904. . Notes on mycetozoa from Japan. 
London J  Bot  42, 97–99   Lister, A., Lister, G., 1905. . Mycetozoa from New Zealand. 
London J  Bot  43, 111–114. .  Lister, A., Lister, G., 1908. 
Notes on Swiss mycetozoa. . London J  Bot  46, 216–219. .  Lister, A., Lister, G., 1911. . Monograph of the Mycetozoa, second ed. . British Museum, London. .  Liu, C.H., 1980. 
Myxomycetes of Taiwan I. . Taiwania 25, 141–151. .  Liu, C.H., 1981. 
Myxomycetes of Taiwan II. . Taiwania 26, 58–67. .  Liu, C.H., 1982. 
Myxomycetes of Taiwan III. . Taiwania 27, 64–85. .  Liu, C.H., 1983. 
Myxomycetes of Taiwan IV. . Taiwania 28, 89–116. .  Lloyd, S., 2014. 
Where the Slime Mould Creeps. . Devonport, Tasmania. 
Lodhi, S.A., 1934. . Indian Slime Moulds. 
Publication Bureau University of Punjab, Lahore. .  Macbride, T.H., 1899. . North American Slime Moulds. 
Macmillan, New York, NY. .  Macbride, T.H., 1922. . North American Slime Moulds, second ed. 
Macmillan, New York, NY. .  Macbride, T.H., Martin, G.W., 1934. . The Myxomycetes. 
Macmillan, New York, NY. .  Maire, R., Patouillard, N., Pinoy, E., 1926. 
Myxomycètes de l’Afrique du Nord. . Bull  Soc  Hist   Nat  Afrique N  17, 38–43   Marchal, E., 1895. . Champignons coprophiles de Belgique. . Bull  Soc  Roy  Bot  Belg  34, 125–149. 
 Marchant, J., 1727. . Les fleurs de la tannée. . Memoirs of the Academy of Science, Paris, 1727, 335–339. .  Markov, M., 1962. 
A contribution to the fungus flora of Bulgaria. . Izvestaia Bot. . Inst  Sofiya 10,  185–193. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., Farr, M.L., 1983. 
The Genera of Myxomycetes. . University of  Iowa Press, Iowa City. 
 76     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Massee, G., 1892. . Monograph of the Myxogastres. 
Methuen & Co., London. .  Mazelaitis, J., Stanevicˆienė, S., 1995. . Mycota Lithuaniae I. . Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidykla,   Vilnius. 
McAlpine, D., 1895. . Systematic Arrangement of Australian Fungi, Myxomycetes. . Agriculture De- partment, Victoria, pp 193–199. . McHugh, R., Stephenson, S.L., Mitchell, D.W., Brims, M.H., 2003. . New records of Australian  Myxomycota. 
N  Z  J  Bot  23, 487–500. .  Meylan, C., 1908. 
Connaisance des myxomycetes du Jura. . Bull  Soc  Vaud  Sci  Nat  44, 285–302. .  Meylan, C., 1935. 
Myxomycètes japonais. . Bull  Soc  Vaud  Sci  Nat  58, 321–324. .  Meylan, C., 1937. 
Nouvelle contribution à la connaissance des myxomycetes du Jura et des Alpes. .  Bull  Soc  Vaud  Sci  Nat  59, 479–486. 
 Micheli, P.A., 1729. . New Genera of Plants, Arranged After the Method of Tournefort. 
The Autrhor,  Florence. . Minakata, K., 1908. . A list of Japanese myxomycetes. 
Bot  Mag  Tokyo 22, 317–323. .  Minakata, K., 1927. . A list of the Japanese species of mycetozoa. 
Bot  Mag  Tokyo 41, 41–47. .  Minter, D.W., Dudka, I.O., 1996. . Fungi of Ukraine. 
CAB International, Egham. .  Mitchell, D.W., 1992. 
The myxomycetes of New Zealand and its island territories. . Nova Hedwigia  55, 231–256. .  Mitchell, D.W., 1995. 
The Myxomycota of Australia. . Nova Hedwigia 60, 269–295. .  Mitchell, D.W., Kylin, H., 1984. 
Some Tunisian myxomycetes. . Bull  Brit  Mycol  Soc  18, 64–65   Moesz, G., 1924–1933. 
Fungi Hungariae. . Folia Cryptog. . 1, 111   Möller, F.H., 1958. 
Fungi of the Faeroes, Part II. . Munksgaard, Copenhagen. . Moreno, G., Illana, C., Castillo, A., García, J.R., 2001. . Myxomycetes de Extremadura. . Impresos  Postalx, Alcala. 
Moroz, E.L., Novozhilov, Y., 1994. . Novya i redkordy mixomiceti Belarus. . Mikologie Fitopatologie  28, 21–27. .  Nakagawa, K., 1934. . A list of mycetozoa from Korea. 
J  Chosen Nat. . Hist  Soc  17, 17–33   Nakazawa, R., 1929. . A list of Formosan mycetozoa. . Trans  Nat  Hist  Soc  Formosa 19, 16–20. .  Nakazawa, R., 1931. . The rare mycetozoan Minakatella longifila G. 
Lister was found in Formosa. .  Trans  Nat  Hist  Soc  Formosa 21, 191–192. .  Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1974. 
De Nederlandse Myxomyceten. . Koninklijke Nederlandse Nat- uurhistorische Vereniging, Zutphen. . Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., Yamamoto, Y., 1988. 
Stemonitis laxifila (Myxomycetes), a new spe- cies from Nepal. . In: Watanabe, M., Malla, S.B. . (Eds.), The Cryptogams of the Himalayas I. .  National Science Museum, Japan, Tsukuba, pp. . 29–30   Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., Yamamoto, Y., 1990. 
Two new species and a new variety of Myxo- mycetes from Nepal. . Proc  K  Ned  Akad  Wetensc  93, 281–286. .  Ndiritu, G.G., Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2009. 
Rapid biodiversity assessment of myxomyce- tes in two regions of Kenya. . Sydowia 61, 287–319. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1993. 
Die Myxomyceten Deutschlands und des angren- zenden Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs, Band 1 Ceratiomyxales,  Echinosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. . Baumann, Gomaringen. . Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., Marx, H., 1995. . Die Myxomyceten und des angrenzen- den Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs, Band 2 Physarales. 
Bau- mann, Gomaringen. . Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., Marx, H., 2000. . Die Myxomyceten und des angrenzen- den Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs, Band 3 Stemonitales. . Bau- mann, Gomaringen. 
The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    77 Novozhilov, Y.K., 1999. . Myxomycetes of the Leningrad region. 
In: Balashova, N.B., Zavarzin, A.A. .  (Eds.), In: Proceedings of St. . Petersburg Society of Naturalists, Ser. . 6  St  Petersburg University  Press, St. . Petersburg, pp. . 197–204   Novozhilov, Y.K., Golubeva, O.E., 1986. 
Epiphytic myxomycetes from the Mongolian Altai and the  Gobi Desert. . Mikologyi Fitopatologyi 20, 368–374. .  Nuttall, T., 1837. . Collections toward a flora of the Territory of Arkansas. 
Transact  Am  Philos  Soc   5, 140–203. .  Oldridge, S.G., Pegler, D.N., Reid, D.A., Spooner, B.M., 1986. 
A collection of fungi from Pahang  and Negri Sembilan (Malaysia). . Kew Bull  41, 855–872. .  Onsberg, P., 1970. . Five new myxomycetes recorded in Denmark. 
Friesia 9, 344–347. .  Panckow, T., 1654. . Herbarium portabile. 
Berlin, Germany. . Patouillard, N., 1928. . Contribution à l’étude des chasmpignons de Madagascar. 
Mém  Acad  Malg   6, 1–49   Penzig, O., 1898. . Die Myxomyceten der Flora von Buitenzorg. 
The Author, Leiden. . Persoon, C., 1801. 
Synopsis Methodica Fungorum. . The Author, Göttingen. . Petch, T., 1909. 
New Ceylon fungi. . Ann  R  Bot  Garden Peradeniya 4, 299–307. .  Petch, T., 1910. 
A list of the mycetozoa of Ceylon. . Ann  R  Bot  Garden Peradeniya 4, 309–371. .  Pirola, A., 1968. . Lista di mixomiceti Italiani. 
Giornale Bot. . Italiano 102, 21–32. .  Pirola, A., Credaro, V., 1971. . Contributo alla flora mixomicetologica Italiano. 
Giornale Bot. .  Italiano  105, 157–165. .  Poelt, J., 1965. 
Myxomyceten aus Nepal. . Khumbu Himalay 2, 59–70. .  Raciborski, M., 1884. . Myxomycetum agri Cracoviensis, genera, speces et varietates novae. 
Rozpr   Akad  Umiej  12, 69–86   Raciborski, M., 1898. . Über die javanischen Schleimpilze. . Hedwigia 37, 50–55. .  Raitvir, A. . (Ed.), 1980. 
Eesti seente. . Tartu  Rammeloo, J., 1973a. . Contribution a la connaisance des myxomycètes du Maroc. . Bull  Soc  Sci   Nat  Phys  Maroc  53, 31–35   Rammeloo, J., 1973b. 
Trichia arundinariae sp. . nov  (Myxomycetes-Trichiaceae) from the National  Kahinu Park (Zaire.). 
Bull  Jardin Nationale Belgique 43, 349–352. .  Rammeloo, J., 1978a. . Systematische studie van de Trichiales en de Stemonitales (Myxomycetes)  van Belgie. 
Verhandelingen van de Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en  schone Kujnsten van Belgie No. . 146  Rammeloo, J., 1978b. . Hemitrichia rubrobrunnea, a new myxomycete from Sierra Leone. 
Bull   Jardin Nationale Belgique 48, 383–386. .  Rammeloo, J., 1981a. 
Flore illustrée des champignons d’Afrique Centrale. . Fasc  8-9  Jardin Bota- nique National de Belgique, Meise. . Rammeloo, J., 1981b. 
Five new myxomycete species (Trichiales) from Rwanda. . Bull  Jardin Natio- nale Belgique 51, 229–230. .  Rammeloo, J., 1983. . Flore illustrée des champignons d’Afrique Centrale. . Fasc 11  Meise  Rammeloo J., Mitchell, D.W., 1994. 
Contribution towards the knowledge of the myxomycetes  of Malawi and Zambia. . In Proceedings of XIIIth Plenary Meeting AETFAT, Malawi, 1, pp. .  785–793  Ramon, E., 1968. 
Myxomycetes of Israel. . Israel J  Bot  17, 207–211. .  Raunkiaer, L., 1888. . Myxomycetes Daniae. 
Bot  Tidsskrift 17, 20. .  Rawson, S.H., 1937. . A list of mycetozoa collected in the vicinity of Dunedin, New Zealand. 
Trans   Proc  R  Soc  N  Z  66, 351–353. .  Reid, D.A., Vanev, S., 1984. 
New or interesting fungi from Bulgaria. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  83,  415–421. .  78     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Reynolds, D.R., 1981. . South-east Asian myxomycetes II: Philippines. 
Kalikasan 10, 127–150. .  Reynolds, D.R., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1971. 
South-east Asian myxomycetes I: Thailand and Burma. .  Pac  Sci  25, 33–38   Rogers, D.P., 1947. . Fungi of the Marshall Islands, Central Pacific Ocean. 
Pac  Sci  1, 92–107   Rojas, C., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2010. . A review of the Costa Rican myxomycetes  ( Amebozoa). 
Brenesia 73–74, 39–57. .  Rojas, C., Valverde, R., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
New additions to the myxobiota of Costa Rica. .  Mycosphere 6, 709–715. .  Rostafinski, J.T., 1873. . Versuch Eines Systems der Mycetozoen. 
Inaugural Dissertation. . University  of Strassberg, Germany. . Rostrup, E., 1903. 
Islands Svampe. . Botan  Tidsskr  25, 281–335. .  Sanderson, A.R., 1922. 
Notes on Malayan mycetozoa. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  7, 239–256. .  Santesson, R., 1964. 
Swedish myxomycetes. . Svensk Bot. 
Tidskrift 58, 113–124. .  Sauter, A.E., 1841. 
Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Pilz-Vegetation des Ober-Pizgaues, im Herzogthune  Salzburg. . Flora 24, 305–320. .  Schäffer, J.C., 1762–1774. 
Fungi bavarica. . Ratsibon  Schinner, F., 1983. . Myxomycetes aus dem Gebiet des Torne Träsk (Abisko) in Schwedisch   Lappland. 
Sydowia 36, 269–276. .  Schinz, H., 1920. . Die Pilze, X. 
Myxogasteres, In: Rabenhorst, L., Grunow, A. . (Eds.), Dr. 
L    Kryptogamen-Flora Von Deutschland, Oesterreichs und der Schweiz, E. . Kummer, Leipzig. . Schnittler, M., 2000. . Ecology and biogeography of myxomycetes. 
Doctoral dissertation, Freidrich- Schiller-Universität Jena. . Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 1993. 
Lepidoderma crustaceum, a nivicolous myxomycete, found  on the island of Crete. . Mycotaxon 71, 387–391. 
 Schrader, H.A., 1797. . Nova Genera Plantarum. . Lipsiae pp. . 32  Schumacher, H.C.F., 1803. 
Enumeratio plantarum in partibus Sallandiae septentrionalis et orientalis  crescentia. . Havniae  Schweinitz, L.D. . von., 1822. 
Synopsis fungorum Carolinae superioris. . Schriften Naturforschenden  Gesellschaft zu Leipzig 1, 20–131. .  Schweinitz, L.D. . von., 1832. . Synopsis fungorum in America Borealis et Media degentum. 
Trans   Am  Philos  Soc  Philadelphia, ser. . 2 IV, 141–316. . Scopoli, G.A., 1772. . Flora Carniolica. . Editio Secunda 1, 1–448. 
Scott, D.H., 1908. . Arthur Lister, F. 
R  S  Lond J  Bot  46, 331–334. .  Sharma, R., Lakhanpal, T.N., 1999. . Systematics and ecology of myxomycetes in the Royal  Kingdom  of Bhutan. 
ICSEM3, Abstracts, 54. . Singh, S.C., 1971. 
Some myxomycetes from Kathmandu Valley (Nepal). . Indian Phytopathol. 
24,  715–721. .  Siwasin, J., Ing, B., 1982. . Myxomycetes from Thailand. 
Nordic J  Bot  2, 369–370. .  Skupienski, F.X., 1926. 
Contribution à l’étude des myxomycetes de Pologne. . Bull  Soc  Myc  Fr   42, 142–169. .  Skvortzow, B.W., 1931. . Mycetozoa from North Manchuria, China. . Phillipp  J  Sci  46, 85–93   Sobels, J.C., 1950. . Nutrition de quelques myxomycètes en culture pures et associées et leurs   propriétes antibiotiques. 
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 16 (3), 123–243. .  Sommerfelt, S.C., 1826. . Supplementum florae Lapponicae quam editit Dr. 
Georgius Wahlenburg  pp.1–331. . Sowerby, J., 1797–1809. . Coloured Figures of English Fungi. . London  Stelfox, M.D., 1915. . Myxomycetes from the Dingle promontory. . Ir  Nat  J  24, 37–39   Stephenson, S.L., 2003. 
The Fungi of New Zealand, Vol. . 3: Myxomycetes of New Zealand. . Fungal  Diversity Press, Hong Kong. 
 The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    79 Stephenson, S.L., 2011a. . Myxomycetes of the New Zealand subantarctic islands. 
Sydowia 63,  215–236. .  Stephenson, S.L., 2011b. 
From morphological to molecular: studies of myxomycetes since the pub- lication of the Martin and Alexopoulos monograph. . Fungal Divers. . 50, 21–34   Stephenson, S.L., Kalyanasundaram, I., Lakhanpal, T.N., 1993. 
A comparative biogeographical  study of myxomycetes in the mid-Appalachians of eastern North America and two regions of  India. . J  Biogeogr  20, 645–657. .  Stephenson, S.L., Laursen, G.A., Seppelt, R.D., 2007. . Myxomycetes of subantarctic Macquarie  Island. 
Aust  J  Bot  55, 439–449. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press  Inc., Portland. .  Stojanowska, W., 1982. 
Myxomycetes Sudetow I. . Acta Micol. 
19, 207–243. .  Thind, K.S., 1973. 
The myxomycetes of India. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  India 1972, 47–64. .  Thind, K.S., 1977. 
The Myxomycetes of India. . Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. . Tode, H.I., 1790. 
Fungi of Mecklenburg, Lüneberg Torrend, C., 1908. . Catalogue raisonné des myxomycetes du Portugal. . Bol  Soc  Portug  Ci  Nat  2,  55–73   Toth, S., 1963. 
Data to the knowledge on the coprophilous microscopic fungi in Hungary I. . Ann   Nat  Hist  Museum Hungary 55, 181–185. 
 Tran, D.Q., Nguyen, H.T.N., Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., 2014. . Myxomycetes from three low- land tropical forests in Vietnam. . Mycosphere 5, 662–672. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Mongkolporn, O., 2006. 
Distribution and occurrence  of myxomycetes in tropical forests of northern Thailand. . Fungal Divers. 
22, 227–242. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Mongkolporn, O., 2008. 
Distribution and occurrence  of myxomycetes on agricultural ground litter and forest floor litter in Thailand. . Mycologia 100,  181–190. .  Transhel, V., 1914. 
Die Pilze und Myxomyceten Kamtschatkans. . Expedition à Kamtchatka 2, 535– 576. .  Ubrizsy, G., 1967a. 
Review of the mycoflora of Hungary I. . Acta Phytopathol. . Acad  Sci  Hung  2,  153–172. .  Ubrizsy, G., 1967b. 
Review of the mycoflora of Hungary II. . Acta Phytopathol. . Acad  Sci  Hung   2, 267–285. .  Ukkola, T., 1998a. . Some myxomycetes from Dar es Salaam (Tanzania) developed in moist cham- ber cultures. 
Karstenia 38, 27–36. .  Ukkola, T., 1998b. . Myxomycetes of the Usambara Mountains, NE Tanzania. 
Acta Bot  Fenn  160,  1–37. .  Ukkola, T., 1998c. 
Tanzanian myxomycetes to the end of 1995. . Publications in Botany from the  University of Helsinki No. . 27  Helsinki  Ukkola, T., Härkönen, M., Saarimäki, T., 1996. . Tanzanian myxomycetes: second survey. 
Karstenia  36, 51–77. .  Vanev, S., Reid, D.A., 1986. 
New taxa and chorologic data for the Bulgarian fungus flora. . Fitologija  21, 63–70. .  Vimba, E., Adamonytė, G., 2003. 
Additional data on Latvian myxomycetes. . Folia Cryptog. . Es- tonica 40, 57–61. .  von Haller, A., 1742. . A Systematic and Descriptive List of Plants Indigenous to Switzerland. 
The  Author, Bern. . Wakefield, E.M., 1950. . Miss Gulielma Lister. 
Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  33, 165–166. .  Walker, L.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. 
The species problem in the myxomycetes revisited. . Protist  167, 319–338. .  80     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Wallroth, F.W., 1833. 
Flora cryptogramica Germaniae.In: Compendium Florae Germanicae, Sectio  II, Plantae Cryptogamicae. . Flora cryptogamia s. 
Cellulosae Scripserunt Math. . Jos  Bluff et  Carol. . Aug  Fingerhuth, Tomus IV, pp. 
923  Wettstein, R. . von, 1886  Vorarbeiten zu einer Pilzflora der Steiermark. . Verhandelingen zur   zoologische-botanische Gesellschaft, Wien 35, 529–618. .  Whitney, K.D., Olive, L.S., 1983. 
A new Didymium from Rarotonga, Cook Islands. . Mycologia 75,  628–633. .  Wichansky, E., 1964. 
Rare and less known myxomycete species in Bohemia and Moravia. . Ceska  Mykologia 18, 55–59. .  Wiehe  P.O., 1948. 
The plant diseases and fungi recorded from Mauritius, Mycological Papers 24. .  Commonwealth Mycological Institute, Kew. . Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2010. . Biodiversity of  myxomycetes in subantarctic forests of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, Argentina. 
Nova   Hedwigia 90, 45–79. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Biodiversity studies  of myxomycetes in Madagascar. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 55–83   Yamamoto, Y., 1998. . The Myxomycete Biota of Japan. . Tokyo  Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., 1990. . Myxomycetes from Central Nepal II. 
In: Watanabe, M., Malla,  S.B. . (Eds.), Cryptogams of the Himalayas 2: Central and Eastern Nepal. . National Science  Museum, Tsukuba, pp. . 33–40   Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., 2003. 
Myxomycetes from the Asir Mountains, Saudi Arabia. .  Bull  Natl  Sci  Museum Tokyo B 29, 23–29. .  Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., 2005. 
Myxomycetes of the Yatsugatake Mts., Central Japan. . Bull   Natl  Sci  Museum Tokyo 31 (3), 79–88. .  Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., Sultana, K., 1992. . Myxomycetes from Northern Pakistan I. 
In:   Nakaike, T., Malik, S. . (Eds.), Cryptogamic Flora of Pakistan Vol. 
1  National Science Mu- seum, Tokyo, pp. . 109–117   Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., Sultana, K., 1993. 
Myxomycetes from Northern Pakistan II. . In: Na- kaike, T., Malik, S. . (Eds.), Cryptogamic Flora of Pakistan Vol. . 2  National Science Museum,  Tokyo, pp. . 25–42   Yamamoto, Y., Matsumoto, J., 1992. 
Three myxomycetes collected in Fiji and Vanuatu. . Hikobia  11, 217–218. .  Zeller, L., Toth, D., 1971. 
Myxomycete data from Hungary. . Ann  Sci  Univ  Budapest Biol. 
Sect   13, 269–278. .  FURTHER READING Ainsworth, G.C., 1952. . The Lister notebooks. 
Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  35, 188–189. .  Alexopoulos, C.J., 1959. . Myxomycetes from Greece. 
Brittonia 11, 25–40. .  Alexopoulos, C.J., 1963. 
The myxomycetes II. . Bot  Rev  29, 1–78   Almeida, M.G., 1964. 
Contribução para o estudo dos myxomycetes de Portugal. . Boletim da   Sociedade Portuguesa ded Ciências Naturals. 
Ser  2, 172–185, 10. .  Boedijn, K.B., 1941. . The mycetozoa, fungi and lichens of the Krakatoa group. 
Bull  Buitenzborg  Bot. . Garden 16, 358–429. .  Clark, J., 2000. . The species problem in myxomycetes. 
Stapfia 73, 39–53. .  de Haan, M., no date. . The adventure of Mike the myxo. . Antwerp  Dhillon, S.S., 1978. 
Bark culture myxomycetes new to India. . Botaniske Notiser 131, 6. .  Gracia, E., 1983. 
Mixomicetes nuevos o interessantes para la Flora Iberica y Balear. . Collectanea  Bot. . 14, 281–284. 
 The History of the Study of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 2    81 Härkönen, M., 1988. . Some additions to the knowledge of Turkish myxomycetes. 
Karstenia 27, 1–7. .  Ing, B., 1982. 
A revised census catalogue of British myxomycetes. . Bull  Brit  Mycol  Soc  16,  26–35. .  Ing, B., 1983. 
Some corticolous myxomycetes from Bombay. . Mycotaxon 17, 299–300. 
 Lawrow, N.N., 1927–1931. . Beiträge zur Schleimpilzflora Sibirens I,II. . Mitteilung Tomske   Botanische Gesellschaft 2, 10–21. .  Li, Y., Li, H.-Z., 1989. 
Myxomycetes of China. . Mycotaxon 35, 429–436. .  Lister, A., 1898. . Mycetozoa of Antigua and Dominica. 
London J  Bot  36, 113–122. .  Lister, A., Lister, G., 1906. 
Mycetozoa from Japan. . London J  Bot  44, 227–230. .  Lister, G., 1931b. 
New species of mycetozoa from Japan. . London J  Bot  69, 297–298. .  Lister, G., 1915. 
Japanese mycetozoa. . Trans  Brit  Mycol  Soc  5, 67–84   Lodhi, S.A., 1951. . Some myxomycetes from western Pakistan. 
Sydowia 5, 375–383. .  Lodhi, S.A. . (as Ahmad, S.), 1956. 
Fungi of West Pakistan. . Biological Society of Pakistan,   Monograph 1. . Lahore  Lodhi, S.A. . (as Ahmad, S.), 1969. 
Fungi of West Pakistan, Supplement. . Biologia Monograph 5. .  Lahore  Lodhi, S.A., (as Ahmad, S.) Asad, F., 1970. 
Coprophilous fungi from West Pakistan, pt. . 3  Pakistan  Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 12, 239–243. . Martin, G.W., Thind, K.S., Sohi, H.S., 1957. 
The myxomycetes of the Mussoorie Hills (India)  IV. . Mycologia 49, 128–133. .  Martin, G.W., Thind, K.S., Rehill, P.S., 1959. 
The myxomycetes of the Mussoorie Hills (India)  X. . Mycologia 51, 159–162. .  Martin, G.W., Lodhi, S.A., Khan, N.A., 1960. . Additional myxomycetes from West Pakistan. 
  Sydowia 14, 281–284. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., 1993. 
Myxomycetes of Russia. . St  Petersburg. 
Poulin, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. . Les Myxomycètes, 2 vols. . Fédération mycologique et  botanique Dauphiné-Savoie, Sevrier. 
Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., 2000. . Myxomycetes collected in Vanuatu. 
Ann  Tsukuba Bot. .   Garden 21, 127–133. .  Yamamoto, Y., Hagiwara, H., Sultana, K., 1995. . Myxomycetes from Northern Pakistan III. 
In:  Watanabe, M., Malla, S.B. . (Eds.), Cryptogams of the Himalayas 3. . National Science Museum,  Tokyo, pp. . 37–44   Page left intentionally blank 83 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00003-2 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 3 The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes Dmitry V. . Leontyev*, Martin Schnittler** *H.S. . Skovoroda Kharkiv National Pedagogical University. .  Kharkiv   Ukraine;   **Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology. 
 Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald. .   Greifswald. 
 Germany INTRODUCTION To the extent that science organizes knowledge in the form of testable state- ments. .  we may only call a classification “scientific” if two different experts  using the same data can produce the same classification. . However, taxono- my has only approached the task of fulfilling of this requirement in the 21st  century. 
Prior to the onset of molecular research. .  different “phenotypic” or  “morphological” classifications were used. 
 known in the East European sci- entific tradition under the names ecomorphema (Kusakin and Drozdov. .  1994)  and epimorphema (Zmitrovich. 
 2010)  These classifications were based on  morphological, anatomical, physiological, biochemical, and many other criteria  available through direct observation. . In order to develop these classifications. 
  scientists were forced (1) to choose the most important characters among the  hundreds of available data. .  and (2) to bind each type of characters to the cer- tain level of classification. .  for instance. .  using the shape for delimiting classes  and the pigmentation for delimiting orders. 
 or vice versa.. . In both cases. 
 deci- sions depended strongly on the views of individual researchers; therefore the  number of classifications was sometimes comparable to the number of tax- onomists working on the particular group in question. . For example. 
 in clas- sifications of myxomycetes. .  higher taxa were delimitated on the basis of spore  color (Corda. 
 1837; Hagelstein. .  1944; Lister. .  1894   1911   1925; Rostafinski. 
  1875)   presence or absence of a capillitium (Raunkiær. .  1888; Torrend. .  1907)    occurrence of lime deposits (Yatchevskiy. 
 1907)   or these three characteristics  considered simultaneously (Macbride. .  1922; Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969;  Nannenga-Bremekamp. .  1991)  By the middle of the 20th century, practically  all possible combinations of easily observable morphological characters had  been used to develop a classification of the group. . The end of discussions in  the 1960s was triggered more by general fatigue than by finding of the proper  answer. 
84     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The principal alternative to the epimorphema is represented by the phylo- genetic classification or phylema (Farris. .  1990)   based on the reconstruction  of the phylogeny (i.e.. .  the sequence of evolutionary events). . Phylema recodes  the evolutionary tree in the form of a taxonomical hierarchy. . In such a classi- fication, closely related species are assigned to one genus, while more distant  ones will not be, even if they share a number of morphological characters with  each other. . Unlike the epimorphema, which is based on arbitrary selection and  ranging of characters, a phylema operates by a single criterion, the structure  of genealogical relations. 
This approach contradicts the famous principle of  Linnaeus, who postulated that the “natural system” must take into consider- ation all of the essential characters of organisms (Linnaeus, 1758). . Based on  this, opponents of phylogenetic classifications often emphasize that the phy- logeny is only one among hundreds of criteria, which have to be considered by  taxonomists (Mayr, 1963). . At the same time. 
 an example of the most successful  natural classification. .  the periodic table of chemical elements. .  shows that one  essential character (the atomic weight) can provide a fundamental basis for  understanding most of the other properties of the objects being classified. 
In  the case of biological systems, the best choice for such a criterion would be a  phylogeny. . The near-identical reproduction of nucleotide sequences together  with the accumulation of changes (mutations) in these sequences form the ba- sis of life as a continuous process. . All of the diversity expressed in taxa is a  direct result of this process and may be ordered in an optimum way on the basis  of phylogeny. . However, this does not mean that phylogenetic classifications are absolutely  free of subjectivism. . The same data set will yield the same classification only if  exactly the same analytical methods are used. . Such a level of uniformity seems  unattainable and even undesirable. . However   taking into consideration that there  existed only one consequence of evolutionary events. 
 it may be expected that  more extensive data sets. .  processed by more powerful analytical methods. .  will  give more and more congruent results. 
A second element of subjectivism is added when phylogenies are expressed  in the context of hierarchical classifications. . Evolution is a continuous process. .   and thus the resulting phylogenies indicate gradual changes. .  whereas ranks in  a hierarchical classification are discrete steps. 
 and their number is limited by  practical reasons. . The number of nodes of the evolutionary tree is obviously  larger than the number of acceptable levels in a practically applicable biological  classification. 
In addition, different ranks may be assigned to the same conse- quence of branches. . For instance, if the clade represented by a certain class  includes two subclades, these clades may be assigned to subclasses, orders of  the same subclass, or even suborders of the same order. . This means that any  formal classification will simplify the structure of genealogical relationships,  but this simplification strongly depends on the concepts adopted by a particu- lar scientist. . One of the possible ways to resolve this problem is to establish a  consensus about basic nodes of phylogenies providing the starting points for  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    85 a classification. 
For instance. .  if we accept for conservative reasons that the high- est level of the classification is called a domain. .  while the level. 
 which unifies  all the Chordata has to be called a phylum. .  this gives us the limits within which  taxa. .  such as the Opisthokonta. .  Metazoa   Bilateria. .  or Deuterostomia may be  categorized. 
PHYLOGENETIC REVOLUTION IN TAXONOMY The concept of phylogenetic classification has existed for more than 150 years  and was initially proposed by Haeckel (1866) on the basis of the ideas put for- ward by Charles Darwin. . However   at the time of Haeckel. .  as well as for more  than 100 years thereafter. 
 any assumptions about the origin and relationships  between taxa were made on the basis of the indirect data represented by com- parative morphology. . More effective were fossil records, but these are not avail- able for most prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes. . In the absence of well-defined  evidence of genealogical relations, classifications of the 19th and 20th centuries  were declared to be phylogenetic, but in fact they were not. 
In the same way as  for morphological classifications. .  these early phylogenies were based on arbi- trary selection and ranking of phenotypic characters. 
 and therefore did not com- ply with the principle of independent reproduction of data. . Solving this problem  required a fundamentally different approach. 
The first real step in the revolution in taxonomy was made by Willi Hennig  and his followers. .  who developed formal procedures for the recoding of evolu- tionary trees into hierarchical classifications. 
One of the most important ideas  proposed by them was the principle of monophyly. .  according to which any  valid taxon must consist of an ancestral species and all its descendants. 
 with  no exceptions (Hennig. .  1966)  Other groups recognized by Hennig were: (1)  polyphyletic taxa. .  such as the Algae. .  Plantae   or Fungi sensu lato. 
 which con- sist of selected descendants of the common ancestor of all eukaryotes. .  and (2)  paraphyletic taxa. .  such as the Green Algae. .  Gymnosperms. .  Pisces   or Reptilia. 
  which include most of the descendants of the same ancestor. .  except for one  “advanced” group (the vascular plants. .  angiosperms. 
 tetrapods. .  and birds. .  re- spectively). 
Both paraphyletic and polyphyletic groups, according to Hennig,  cannot be used in classification. . This rule questioned the justification for the  existence of many traditional taxa, and this caused a long-standing debate. 
Crick (1958) postulated that the evolution of organisms can be reduced to  the evolution of their nucleic acids. . This statement was soon confirmed by the  comparison of amino acid sequences of proteins in vertebrates; more related  groups have been shown to have more similar sequences (Kendrew, 1963). . This  meant that a comparison of biopolymer sequences can be used to determine the  relationships between taxa. 
But could the gene similarity be the result of conver- gence. .  as is the case for many morphological characters of organisms? In most  cases. .  the answer is “no. 
” because the vast majority of gene mutations are neu- tral with respect to natural selection. .  having no influence on the conformation  86     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology of proteins or structural ribonucleic acid (RNA) (Kimura. .  1968)  The indepen- dence of these gene mutations from the pressure of natural selection makes them  independent from adaptations. . As such, similar genotypes, in contrast to similar  phenotypes, may reliably indicate evolutionary relationships. . The step from this theory to practice required the selection of genes, which  could serve as a marker of phylogeny. . To become useful in phylogenetic studies,  the studied gene must (1) originate from a single ancestral gene, and (2) be pres- ent in all the organisms being studied. 
A suitable gene corresponding to these  requirements was found in 1974 by Carl Woese and appeared to encode the  structure of ribosomal RNA (rRNA). . Ribosomes probably arose even before the  cells (Bokov and Steinberg, 2009; Root-Bernstein and Root-Bernstein, 2015)  and did not change their function for nearly 3 billion years. 
A comparison of the  structure of the 16/18S rRNA gene was used as the basis for the first molecu- lar phylogeny of living organisms (Woese, 1990). . The modern phylogenetic  classifications (deep tree of life) appearing over the next 2 decades showed the  potential of this approach. 
MARKER GENES FOR MYXOMYCETES Among tens of thousands of genes encoded in eukaryotic genomes. .  only five  groups have been widely applied thus far to reconstruct the phylogeny of myxo- mycetes. 
 and three of these are associated with the ribosomes. . These are (1)  coding rRNA genes (Vogt and Braun. .  1976)   (2) the internal transcribed spac- ers. 
 ITS1 and ITS2. .  located between rRNA genes (Martin et al.. .  2003; Fiore- Donno et al.. 
 2011)   and (3) the self-splicing group I introns located within the  coding sequences of the rRNA genes (Wikmark et al.. .  2007)  As independent- ly inherited alternative markers. 
 the gene of the eukaryotic elongation factor. .   EF-1α (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2011; Feng et al.. .  2016)   and the gene of mitochon- drial cytochrome c subunit I. 
 COI (Rundquist and Gott 1995; Feng and Schnit- tler. .  2015)   have been used in certain studies. . Schnittler et al. 
(2017) provided an  overview of the available markers used to barcode myxomycete species (which  are not necessarily most suitable for phylogenetic studies). . rRNA forms the skeleton of ribosomes. . In 80S ribosomes, which function in  the cytoplasm of eukaryotes, the small subunit (SSU) contains 18S rRNA, while  the large one comprises three RNA molecules (5S, 5.8S, and 28S). . Genes 18S    5 8S   and 28S are located within one transcription unit. .  the nuclear ribosomal  operon. 
 which includes additional noncoding sections. .  the nontranscribed spac- er (NTS). .  the external transcribed spacer (ETS). .  and two internal transcribed  spacers (ITS1 and ITS2). . Their sequence within the transcription unit is NTS— ETS—18S—ITS1—5.8S—ITS2—26/28S (Steitz, 2008). . rRNA constitutes nearly 80% of the total cellular RNA. . Such an amount  requires an intensive transcription. . This may be achieved by the production of  multiple extrachromosomal copies of rRNA genes. . These copies. 
 concentrated  primarily in the nucleolus. .  are called mini-chromosomes (Torres-Machorro  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    87 et al.. .  2010) or ribosomal DNA (rDNA) (Johansen et al.. .  1992)  The existence of  multiple copies greatly helps to obtain sequences from scanty or limited mate- rial, making rDNA the best accessible marker for phylogeny studies. . Moreover    with rare exceptions. 
 the SSU sequences are homogeneous. .  since one of the  parental genotypes is usually eliminated in crosses during plasmodial develop- ment (Ferris et al.. 
 1983; Feng and Schnittler. .  2015) and this strongly enhances  the readability of a sequence. . Finally   in contrast to protein-coding genes. 
 where  the variation is relatively evenly distributed (and found mostly among the third  base of each triplet). .  rDNA shows a pattern of alternating conservative and  extremely variable sections according to the secondary structure of the rRNA  (Smit et al.. .  2007)  This greatly helps in the identification of target regions for  primers and sequence alignment (Schnittler et al., 2017). . A disadvantage of rDNA as a phylogenetic marker is that universal primers,  able to amplify this gene in all species of myxomycetes, are still unknown (Feng  and Schnittler, 2017). 
Another problem is created by the frequent occurrence of  group I introns in this part of genome (Fiore-Donno et al., 2013). . The evolu- tion of these parasitic genes was most likely shaped by horizontal gene trans- fer and thus their presence does not occur in parallel with the evolution of the  host organism (Feng and Schnittler. 
 2015)  Therefore, complete SSU sequences  become unpredictable in size and are difficult to obtain. . Only the first ca. 
600  bases of rDNA are free of introns. . The information from such a small section  is usually sufficient for barcoding of species but is often inadequate to resolve  deeper evolutionary relationships. . Despite these and other problems, rDNA remains the most widely applied  phylogenetic marker in studies of myxomycetes. . The overwhelming majority  of the phylogenetic information currently available for these organisms was  obtained using different portions of rDNA (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2005   2008;  Leontyev et al.. .  2014a  b   2015; Walker et al.. 
 2015)  The most important for  taxonomy is the 5′-domain of 18S rDNA, which consists of 18 helices and  ends before the first intron insertion site. . It contains four polymorphic helices  called E8-1, E10, E10-1, and E11, which vary, especially in their paired (stem)  regions, even in closely related species (Fiore-Donno et al., 2012). 
Other markers appear less useful in studies of myxomycete phylogeny. . For  example, the group I introns in myxomycetes are too polymorphic to distinguish  taxa at a species or higher level. . Most importantly, their evolutionary history is  different from that of the host (the myxomycete) (Feng and Schnittler, 2015). 
 It has been found that even different populations of the same species may dif- fer in the presence of a particular intron. . However, group I introns are valuable  tools to study population genetics and variations in life cycle of myxomyce- tes (Wikmark et al., 2007). 
The internal transcribed spacers of rDNA have the  same disadvantage. . The ITS2 sequences of the related species Didymium iridis  and Physarum polycephalum display only a 53% match (Martin et al.. .  2003);  similar relationships were found for two species of Lamproderma (Fiore-Donno  et al.. 
 2011)  In addition. .  ITS regions are linked with coding ribosomal genes. .   88     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology and therefore cannot serve as an independent control marker for them. . A po- tentially useful marker for myxomycete phylogenies is the mitochondrial COI  gene (Schnittler et al.. 
 2017)   for which near-universal primers are available  (Feng and Schnittler. .  2015; Rundquist and Gott. 
 1995)  In addition, this marker  displays insertional RNA editing in myxomycetes (Schnittler et al., 2017). . One of the most appropriate alternatives to the ribosomal genes is repre- sented by the EF-1α gene. 
In contrast to all other markers discussed so far, this  nuclear gene shows Mendelian inheritance (Feng et al., 2016). . Like COI, this  marker is a protein-coding gene, thus variation is largely limited to the third base  of a triplet and as a result is rather low. . Splicesomal introns (Feng et al. . 2016)  prove this rule. 
As a single-copy gene, this marker is slightly more difficult to  amplify. . However, it has been used successfully for dark-spored myxomycetes  (Feng et al., 2016; Fiore-Donno et al., 2011). 
The EF-1α gene, together with  other protein-coding genes, was also used for disclosing the evolutionary rela- tionships among major groups of Amoebozoa (Fiz-Palacios et al., 2013). . OBTAINING SEQUENCES OF MYXOMYCETE DNA To obtain DNA sequences. .  a researcher should take the following steps: (1)  select material from which DNA can be obtained. .  (2) extract DNA from this  material. .  (3) amplify selected portions of the genome. .  and (4) carry out se- quencing of received amplicons using one of the existing techniques. 
Clean  axenic cultures are obviously the best source of DNA for phylogenetic studies. .  However   this source is often not suitable for myxomycetes because only a few  selected species. 
 mostly from the families Physaraceae and Didymiaceae. .  have  been cultured on agar media (and even these cultures often are not axenic). .  Therefore, the main sources of DNA for phylogenetic research of myxomycetes  are fruiting bodies, kept in personal collections and herbaria. 
Among the ele- ments of a fruiting body. .  only mature spores usually contain genomic DNA; all  other parts. 
 with rare exceptions. .  have a noncellular structure and do not contain  nuclei (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008   2010)  Specimens of myxomycetes used in molecular studies must meet the follow- ing requirements (Leontyev. 
 2016a; Postel. .  2014): (1) have no visible evidence  of contamination by filamentous fungi and invertebrates. .  (2) have an intact pe- ridium or cortex (this reduces the risk of contamination with the spores of an- other species). 
 (3) be placed in an individual paper box in the field. .  with this box  kept in a zip-lock plastic bag to avoid cross-contamination of specimens. .  and (4)  should not be older than about 10 years. 
 otherwise successful DNA extraction  becomes much less likely. . A time-efficient approach for DNA extraction is provided by commercial- ly available kits. 
 which include a set of reagents and filters (see examples in  Anonymous. .  2013a   2015)   but extraction works as well with a set of reagents  that are available in any laboratory. . In the first stage of extraction, the fruit- ing bodies have to be homogenized to break down the spore walls. . To do this,  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    89 fruiting bodies should be placed in plastic tubes along with steel balls or glass  beads, kept in freezer for ca. . 30 min and then shaken on the laboratory mill for  5 min. 
The next step is the lysis of cellular and nuclear membranes with lysis  buffers, which contain detergents. . Simultaneously, or at the next stage, proteins  and RNA can be destroyed with the use of proteinase K and RNAse, respec- tively. 
Next, the suspension is treated with a concentrated salt solution to pre- cipitate debris (broken cell walls, proteins, lipids, and RNA) and then this debris  is filtered to remove it. . Finally, DNA is purified from the reagents used in the  previous steps. . To do this, sodium acetate and ethanol or isopropanol is added  to the solution, causing the DNA to immobilize on the membrane of the spin  column. . Immobilized DNA is then washed 2–3 times by alcohol, which seeps  through the filter during centrifugation. . After this has taken place, the alcohol  is removed by centrifugation, and the DNA pellet is redissolved in a slightly  alkaline buffer (Tris/EDTA, Tris/Borate/EDTA, etc.) or in ultrapure water. . The extract obtained in this manner contains the total DNA of the studied  species of myxomycete. 
For Sanger sequencing of the selected gene (e.g., the  18S rRNA), a strong increase in its concentration in needed. . This amplification  step is provided by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). . This method is based  on repeatedly copying the DNA region using artificially synthesized primers. .   short DNA chains which are complementary to both ends of the studied frag- ment of DNA (Lodish et al.. .  2012; Sambrook and Green. 
 2012)  The success of  PCR strongly depends upon the proper choice of primers. . In contrast to higher  animals and plants, universal primers able to amplify any informative portion of  the genome in all species of myxomycetes are difficult to find. 
Therefore, differ- ent specific primers have been developed for different groups, using sequences,  received by universal primers as a template. . Primers used for sequencing the  DNA of the dark- and bright-spored myxomycetes are mostly different (Fiore- Donno et al., 2005, 2008, 2013). 
To obtain evidence that the targeted portion of genome has been successfully  amplified, a gel electrophoresis may be carried out. . For this   a fraction of the  obtained solution of PCR-products (amplicons) is transferred to the surface of  agarose gel and run for 20–30 min on the electrophoresis apparatus at a voltage  of 95–100 V/cm. . Under the influence of the electromagnetic field, amplicons  move within a gel from the negative to the positive electrode. 
The speed of their  movement depends on the length of the DNA fragment (short fragments move  quicker). . Thus, the position of amplicons in the gel after electrophoresis allows  us to determine their relative lengths and indirectly indicates the success of am- plification. . Visualization of amplicons is provided by different intercalating or  fluorescent dyes, added before or after electrophoresis. 
If electrophoresis shows that PCR resulted in amplification of the select- ed gene. .  PCR products are usually purified using commercial kits (see ex- ample in Anonymous. 
 2013b) or chelating agents. .  such as Chelex 100 (Walsh  et al.. .  1991)  Purified fragments are ready to be sequenced, if diluted to the  standard concentration for the particular device being used. . 90     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Due to the still unprecedented low error rate of this method. .  studies of  selected genes of myxomycetes for taxonomic purposes are usually carried  out by Sanger sequencing with the dye-terminator method (Sambrook and  Green. 
 2012; Smith et al.. .  1986)  The PCR product. .  containing the amplified  fragments of the studied gene. .  is subjected to a second sequencing PCR where  only one of the two primers. .  DNA polymerase. 
 a set of four nucleotide triphos- phates (dNTP). .  and four fluorescent dideoxynucleotide triphosphates (ddNTP)  is added. . The ddNTPs lack the 3′-hydroxyl group, which stops further elonga- tion after their inclusion in the new DNA chain. 
As a result of the reaction, a  set of DNA fragments with different lengths and ends labeled with different  fluorescent dyes is produced. . The reaction mixture is exposed to capillary elec- trophoresis, during which the fragments of DNA move in the electromagnetic  field. . In a detection window the four different dyes are excited by a laser, and  the fluorescence is detected. 
Since the speed of fragment movement depends  on its length, the sequence of registered fragments reproduces the sequence of  nucleotides in the studied gene (Lodish et al., 2012). . A resulting chromatogram  is usually recorded in an *.ab1 format file, with the nucleotide sequence auto- matically reconstructed by the computer. . Obtained sequence may further cor- rected manually by visual inspection of chromatograms, for example, using the  software ChromasLite (Technelysium Pty Ltd). . The sequence obtained then has to be checked to ensure that it actually  represents (1) the selected species and not a contaminant, and (2) the selected  portion of the genome. 
To achieve this, the search of similar sequences in on- line databases is carried out. . The largest database of sequences. .  the NCBI Gen- Bank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/). .  is equipped with a powerful  sequence search tool. .  BLAST (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). 
 which  automatically compares the sequence in question against all sequences main- tained in the database and calculates the percentage of overlap. . HOW TO BUILD A TREE? The first stage in sequence analysis is to build an alignment. .  where sequences  obtained from related species are stacked together in such a way that a maxi- mum number of columns with identical bases can be achieved with a minimum  number of gaps in between. . This procedure is based on an assumption that all  the variants of a certain gene. 
 represented in related species. .  have evolved from  one hypothetical sequence. .  which was present in the last common ancestor of  the group. . Therefore, the purpose of alignment is to identify the mutations that  occurred in the studied gene of this ancestor during its evolution. 
If one finds  that a nucleotide is present in sequence A but is absent in sequence B. .  this in- dicates that either the insertion of a nucleotide has happened in A or a deletion  of a nucleotide has occurred in B (it is initially unknown which of these two  hypotheses is more probable). . To align the sequences A and B, one has to enter  a gap in sequence B instead of the lacking nucleotide. 
This shifts the following  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    91 part of sequence B one step forward. .  bringing it in line with those of sequence  A. 
 in which the loss of nucleotide is not observed. . If number of nucleotides in  compared sequences does not change but some of them are replaced by others. .   the purpose of alignment is to find a position where replacement has occurred  (Graur and Li. .  2000; Li   1997; Nei and Kumar. 
 2000)  The quality of the alignment critically affects the reliability of the subse- quent phylogenetic hypotheses, because all algorithms of phylogenetic analyses  use an alignment as primary information. . The most obvious way to obtain an  accurate alignment is to do it manually, by consequent checking of all the posi- tions of compared sequences. 
Contrary to expectations, this method is of limited  use. . Manual alignment intuitively aims to establish the most complete match  between the sequences, and this can be achieved only by introducing the maxi- mum number of gaps. . However   it has been proven that insertions and deletions  occur during the course of evolution considerably less often than replacement  of nucleotides. .  since in protein-coding genes they will lead to a reading frame  shift. 
Therefore   a more desirable (and more comprehensible) approach to the  comparison of sequences is the use of formal algorithms. .  in which the forma- tion of insertions and deletions (opening of the gap) is charged by penalties. 
 This allows to obtain a less “perfect” but more realistic evolutionary scenario  (Hall, 2011; Loytynoja and Goldman, 2008). . Among the alignment algorithms used for automatic alignment. 
 the most  popular are ClustalW. .  ClustalX   MUSCLE (Multiple Sequence Alignment) and  MAFFT (Multiple Alignment using Fast Fourier Transform). . The latter algo- rithm is often considered to be most effective when aligning sequences with  long nonhomologous introns or evolutionarily distant homologous sections  with low similarity (Katoh et al.. .  2002)  The final result of a phylogenetic study is the phylogram, which can be  seen as a hypothesis of evolutionary divergences. . Phylograms are created on  the basis of sequence alignment using one of more than ten algorithms, which  are divided into two groups, distance algorithms and probability algorithms. .  The first group of algorithms is based on the measurement of evolutionary dis- tances (i.e., the number of mismatches) between sequences. . Using Ockham’s  razor (the simplest of several hypotheses explaining the phylogeny is consid- ered the most likely; principle of parsimony). 
 distance algorithms build a tree  based on minimal total distance. . This method of phylogenetic reconstruction is  used by such algorithms as the Unweighted Pair Group Method with Arithmetic  Mean, Minimum Evolution, and Neighbor Joining. 
In contrast, probability al- gorithms consider differences between the sequences at specific sites separately. .  The goal of these methods is the reconstruction of an evolutionary scenario  that leads to the existing sequences with the highest probability. . This group of  algorithms includes methods, such as Maximum Parsimony, Maximum Likeli- hood, and Bayesian Inference. 
The last two methods are most popular in current  phylogenetic studies in myxomycetes (Fiore-Donno et al., 2005, 2012, 2013;  Kretzschmar et al., 2016; Leontyev et al., 2015; Nandipati et al., 2012). . 92     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The Maximum Likelihood method is based on the use of formal models  of genome evolution. .  in which the probability of each mutation (e.g.. .  A → T  substitution) is previously deducted. 
The respective programs calculate the like- lihood of different scenarios that could lead to a certain sequence if evolution  took place according to the specified model. . The Bayesian Inference is used to  update the probability for an evolutionary hypothesis as more evidence or infor- mation becomes available. 
Primary analysis of data makes it possible to create a  list of most probable phylogenetic models without involving the full amount of  data. . The full data set is used to calculate the likelihood of these initial models  and find the most likely tree explaining the full alignment (Graur and Li, 2000;  Li, 1997; Nei and Kumar, 2000). 
It is impossible to know to what extent a phylogram corresponds to the real  sequence of evolutionary events. . However, we can estimate the statistical reli- ability that the proposed phylogram was not obtained under the influence of  accidental events. 
This probability is estimated through the use repetitive sam- pling methods, with bootstrapping as the most effective. . In this method, the  positions of analyzed alignment are placed in random order, and each position  may be evaluated one to several times or completely ignored. . As a result, 1000  or more so-called pseudo-alignments are generated, each containing a randomly  transformed sequence. . Then, each pseudo-alignment is used to build a tree. 
The  whole set of these pseudo-trees is compared with the true phylogram. . The per- centage of pseudo-trees, which contain the same node as resulting phylogram is  regarded as the confidential assessment of this node (Hall, 2011). . With the methods outlined earlier. 
 during the last decade the still very frag- mentary data has provided insights into the position of myxomycetes within  eukaryotic organisms and the main steps in myxomycete evolution. .  although  the phylogenetic tree of myxomycetes is still scattered with numerous blank  spots. 
The following paragraphs summarize the knowledge currently available. . WHERE ARE MYXOMYCETES IN THE TREE OF LIFE? In the 1980s, it was shown that cellular organisms split into three basal domains:  Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukaryota (Woese, 1990). . However, studies led to the  conclusion that the Archaea are paraphyletic with the Eukaryotes and therefore  cannot be considered as a separate domain. . Together with the Eukaryotes, Ar- chaea may form a joint domain Arkarya (Arkaryota, Eocyta, and Karyota), as  opposed to the second domain called Bacteria (Spang et al., 2015). . Treatments (Adl et al.. 
 2005   2012; Burki. .  2014; Burki et al.. 
 2016; Cavalier- Smith. .  2010; Forterre. .  2015; Ruggiero et al.. .  2015) have recognized three  supergroups within the eukaryotes. 
 which have been named the Excavata. .   Diaphoretickes. .  and Amorphea (Fig. . 3 1)  The subdomain Excavata is com- posed of ancient. 
 mainly heterotrophic unicellulates and includes two large  taxa: the Discoba. .  having mitochondria with discoidal cristae (e.g.. .  Jakobida    Kinetoplastida. .  Euglenida. 
 and Heterolobosea) and the Metamonada. .  possessing  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    93 FIGURE 3.1 The position of the myxomycetes (arrow) within the eukaryotic tree of life (author of the picture: D.V. 
Leontyev)  1  Collodictyonida; 2. . Oxy- monadida; 3. . Trichomonadida; 4. . Hypermastigida; 5. . Diplomonadida; 6. . Retortamonadida; 7. 
Malawimonadida; 8. . Jakobida; 9. . Kinetoplastida; 10. . Euglenida; 11. .  Heterolobosea; 12. 
Flabellinea; 13. . Euamoebida; 14. . Arcellida; 15. . Copromyxida; 16. . Variosea; 17. 
Pelobiontida; 18. . Mastigamoebida; 19. 
Entamoebidae; 20. . Proto- sporangiida; 21. . Dictyosteliomycetes; 22. . Myxomycetes; 23. 
Apusomonadida; 24. . Ancyromonadida; 25. 
Breviatida; 26. . Nuclearida; 27. 
Fonticulida; 28. . Aphelidea;  29. 
Microsporidia; 30. . Cryptomycota; 31. . Chytridiomycota; 32. . Amastigomycota; 33. 
Filasterea; 34. . Corallochytrida; 35. 
Mesomycetozoea; 36. . Choanoflagellata; 37. 
 Placozoa; 38. . Parazoa; 39. . Radiata; 40. . Xenacoelomorpha; 41. 
Protostomia; 42. . Deuterostomia; 43. 
Mesostigmatophyceae; 44. . Klebsormidiophyceae; 45. 
Zygnema- tophyceae; 46. . Charophyceae; 47. . Coleochaetophyceae; 48. . Nephroselmidophyceae; 49. 
Pyramimonadophyceae; 50. . Chlorodendrophyceae; 51. . Chlorophyceae; 52. .  Ulvophyceae; 53. . Marchantiophyta; 54. . Bryophyta; 55. 
Anthocerotophyta; 56. . Tracheophyta; 57. 
Cyanidiophytina; 58. . Rhodophytina; 59. . Glaucophyta; 60. 
Katableph- arida; 61. . Goniomonas; 62. . Cryptophyceae; 63. 
Centrohelida; 64. . Haptophyta; 65. . Ciliophora; 66. 
Apicomplexa; 67. . Protaveolata; 68. 
Dinoflagellata; 69. . Bicosoecida;  70. . Labyrinthulomycetes; 71. . Opalinida; 72. 
Bolidophyceae; 73. . Bacillariophyceae; 74. 
Synurophyceae; 75. . Xanthophyceae; 76. . Phaeophyceae; 77. . Chrysophyceae;  78. . Raphidophyceae; 79. 
Actinophryida; 80. . Oomycota; 81. . Cercomonadida; 82. . Euglyphida; 83. 
Plasmodiophoromycetes; 84. . Haplosporidia; 85. . Gromiida; 86. 
Chlor- arachniophyceae; 87. . Foraminifera; 88. . Radiolaria. 
94     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology hydrogenosomes or mitosomes instead of mitochondria (e.g., Oxymonadida,  Trichomonadida, and Diplomonadida). . The second subdomain, the Diapho- retickes, unites unicellular and multicellular, often highly organized forms, a  considerable portion of which are photosynthetic. . Within this group. 
 the super- kingdom Archaeplastida is composed of the three main kingdoms of primarily  photosynthetic organisms: the glaucophytes. .  red algae. .  and green plants (includ- ing the green algae and terrestrial plants). 
Another superkingdom, called Sar (an  acronym for Stramenopiles + Alveolate + Rhizaria), is composed of three king- doms with a heterotrophic or secondarily photosynthetic type of feeding. . It is  made up of the Chromista (e.g.. .  ochrophyte algae. .  Bicosoecida. .  Oomycota   and  Opalinida). 
 Alveolata (e.g.. .  Dinoflagellata. .  Ciliata   and Apicomplexa) and Rhi- zaria (e.g.. 
 Cercozoa   Foraminifera. .  Chlorarachniophyta. .  and Radiolaria). 
The  groups called Cryptista (Cryptophyta) and Haptista (Haptophyta and centrohelid  Heliozoa) form separate branches within the Diaphoretickes (Burki et al., 2016). .  Finally, the third subdomain, the Amorphea (Adl et al., 2012), consists of two  main groups, which can be considered as superkingdoms. 
These are the Obazoa  (Brown et al., 2013) and the Amoebozoa (Adl et al., 2012). . The Obazoa includes  unicellular Apusozoa and the large group Opisthokonta. 
 which   in turn   includes  the Holozoa (choanoflagellates. .  animals and related groups) and Holomycota. .   also known under the name Nucletmycea (true fungi and related groups). 
The second superkingdom. .  called Amoebozoa. .  is characterized by broad  blunt pseudopodia. 
 tubular mitochondrial cristae. .  and a flagellar apparatus  with one or two strongly unequal flagella (Cavalier-Smith. 
 2009)  Studies of  the morphology and ultrastructure of myxomycetes. .  as well their life cycle and  sexual processes. .  has led to the conclusion that the myxomycetes unambigu- ously belong to this group of eukaryotes (Olive. 
 1975; Spiegel. .  1990   1991)   This assumption is strongly supported by molecular phylogenies (Baldauf and  Doolittle, 1997; Baldauf et al., 2000). . Amoebozoans are divided on two large clades. 
These are the Lobosa, usu- ally having several finger-like pseudopodia, and the Conosa, for which a single,  broadly hemispherical pseudopodium is typical. . The amoeboid cells of myxo- mycetes demonstrate this feature of the Conosa. 
 and indeed. .  the molecular phy- logeny supports that they belong to this branch of the Amoebozoa (Fiz-Palacios  et al.. .  2013; Shadwick et al.. .  2009)  The group Conosa consists of three main branches. . These are (1) the aero- bic Eumycetozoa (or Mycetozoa sensu stricto). .  (2) anaerobic Archamoebae  (Cavalier-Smith. 
 2009)   and (3) the Variosea. .  which is represented by several  basal branches of the Conosa (Cavalier-Smith et al.. .  2015)  The taxon Eumyceto- zoa was initially proposed by Olive (1975) for three groups capable to form fruit- ing bodies: the Protostelia (the fruiting body usually consists of a single spore  and a noncellular stalk. 
 the feeding stage is a plasmodium ). .  the Dictyostelia (the  fruiting body with numerous spores and a cellular stalk in most instances. .  the  feeding stage is a pseudoplasmodium). 
 and the Myxomycetes (the fruiting body  with numerous spores and noncellular stalks. .  the feeding stage is a plasmodium). 
 The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    95 However. .  as it has been shown by both morphological and molecular studies  that the Eumycetozoa include a number of nonfruiting amoebal groups (Baldauf  et al.. .  2000)  Moreover   the protostelioid type of fruiting body formation. 
 usually  considered as ancestral for all of the Eumycetozoa. .  has appeared in the evolution  of the Amoebozoa on at least eight different occasions (Shadwick et al.. .  2009)   Only five of these eight lineages involved belong to the Eumycetozoa. . These are  the protosporangiids, protosteliids, soliformoviids, cavosteliids, and schizoplas- modiids (Shadwick et al., 2009). . Among these five. 
 the protosporangiid clade  (Protosporangium. .  Clastostelium. 
 and the macroscopic genus Ceratiomyxa)  show the closest affinity to myxomycetes in the structure of the fruiting body  (with a fruiting body producing multiple spores in Protosporangium). .  the stalk  formation and the morphology of sexual processes. . The obligate amoebae of the  protosporangiids and especially the protoplasmodium of Ceratiomyxa possess  morphological and ultrastructural similarities to the plasmodia of myxomycetes  (Shadwick. 
 2011)  This led to the conclusion. .  that the fruiting bodies of myxo- mycetes are homologous with the fruiting bodies of protosporangiids and the last  common ancestor of myxomycetes certainly was characterized by a protosporan- giid-like fruiting body. .  the further evolution of which included the differentiation  of a peridium and the formation of capillitial structures. . In summary. 
 the position of myxomycetes in the hierarchy of higher-ranking  taxa can be shown as outlined below [with examples of genera derived from the  last common ancestor in brackets]: Domain: Eukarya Woese (1977) [Euglena. .  Rosa   Laminaria]  Subdomain: Amorphea Adl et al. . (2012) [Homo, Agaricus]    Superkingdom: Amoebozoa Lühe (1913) emend. . Cavalier-Smith  (1998) [Amoeba, Arcella]    Kingdom: Conosa Cavalier-Smith (1998) [Pelomyxa, Entamoeba]      Phylum: Eumycetozoa L.S. . Olive (1975); = Mycetozoa de Bary  (1859) sensu strictu: [Protostelium, Cavostelium, Soliformovum]       Subphylum: Macromycetozoa Fiore-Donno et al. . (2010) [Dictyo- stelium, Ceratiomyxa, Protosporangium, Clastostelium]        Class: Myxomycetes G. . Winter (1880) p.p.; = Myxogastria  Fr. . (1829) emend. . Cavalier-Smith (2013). 
The latter taxon unites only the plasmodial slime molds, forming multisporous  fruiting bodies with endogenous spores. . The separation of the myxomycete  branch from the rest of the Eumycetozoa was recently dated as having taken  place some 700 million to 1 billion years ago (Fiz-Palacios et al., 2013). . MAJOR BRANCHES OF THE MYXOMYCETE TREE The first efforts to elucidate the phylogeny of the major branches of the myxo- mycetes was made by Fiore-Donno et al. . (2005)   using complete 18S rDNA  and EF1α sequences for 11 species of myxomycetes which represented all five  classical orders (i.e.. 
 the Echinosteliales. .  Liceales   Trichiales. 
 Stemonitales. .  and  96     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Physarales). 
The results from this study indicated that the myxomycetes are a  monophyletic group which splits into two basal clades. . The first clade unites  members of the traditional orders Stemonitales and Physarales, which have dark  (different tints of brown or black) spores pigmented by abundant melanin. . The  second clade includes the Liceales and Trichiales. 
 which possess bright spores  (red. .  orange   pink   yellow   or olive) colored by various organic pigments. .  while  melanin. .  if present at all. 
 occurs in their spores in very low concentrations (Kaly- anasundaram. .  1994)  The fifth order, the Echinosteliales, was shown to occupy  a basal position in the phylogeny but appears to have a strong affinity to the  dark-spored group. . Except for the small genera Barbeyella and Clastoderma. 
  members of the Echinosteliales have mostly hyaline spores but are connected to  the dark-spored group by the presence of a columella. .  a structure that represents  an extension of the stalk inside the sporotheca (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2005)  Based on these data, Cavalier-Smith (2013), using zoological nomenclature,  separated the class Myxogastrea into two superorders. 
The first of these. .  the  Columellidia (those having a columella). .  united the dark-spored myxomycetes. .   or the Fuscisporidia (consisting of the traditional orders Stemonitales and Phy- sarales) and the related Echinosteliales. . Interestingly. 
 this classification general- ly corresponds to the systems of Rostafinski (1875) and his followers. .  including  Lister (1894. .  1911   1925) and Hagelstein (1944) but contrasts the classifica- tions. .  which recognize four or five orders (e.g.. 
 Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969;  Nannenga-Bremekamp. .  1991; Poulain et al.. .  2011)  Results from molecular  studies refuted as well the assumption that the separation of the main branches  of the myxomycetes corresponds to the presence of a capillitium or lime depos- its (Raunkiær. 
 1888; Torrend. .  1907; Yatchevskiy. .  1907)  In a similar fashion. 
  the separation of the Stemonitales into the subclass Stemonitomycetidae on the  basis of an epihypothallic fruiting body development (Ross. .  1973) was not sup- ported by molecular phylogenies. . Subsequent studies of both the Columellidia (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008   2012)  have supported that the basic position within Columellidia is occupied by  the Echinosteliales. .  which include several studied species of Echinostelium  (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008   2012)   the monotypic genus Barbeyella (Fiore- Donno et al.. 
 2012)   and the enigmatic stalkless myxomycete Semimorula  (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2009)  The position of the genus Clastoderma remains  unclear; however. .  there are reasons to believe that it also belongs to the Echi- nosteliales (Kretschmar et al.. .  2016)   showing all of the features of this order. 
  including a stalk composed of granular material. .  a thin columella and filamen- tous capillitium (Poulain et al.. .  2011)  Apart from the echinosteliid superclade (Table 3.1, Fig. . 3 2)   dark-spored  myxomycetes were found to split into three clades. 
 two of which partially corre- spond to the classical Stemonitales and Physarales. .  but the third and most separat- ed one is formed by the genus Meriderma. .  with most of its species known before  2011 as the Lamproderma atrosporum group (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008   2012;  Poulain et al.. 
 2011)  This Meridermid clade is united by a peridium splitting  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    97 into fragments attached to the free ends of capillitial threads. . It unites at least  all known species of Meriderma and the Collaria rubens (=Comatricha rubens)  (Fiore-Donno et al., 2008, 2012). 
This connection of peridium and capillitium  seems to be an ancient character of the dark-spored myxomycetes and is also  displayed by some Echinosteliales (Schnittler et al., 2000). . The second (Stemonitid) clade of the Fuscisporidia includes most of the Ste- monitales, namely, those having a fugacious peridium, which completely disap- pears in mature fruiting bodies. . The third (Lamprodermid) clade of dark-spored  myxomycetes unites. 
 with no exceptions. .  all of the members of the Physarales. .   and the remaining part of Stemonitales. 
 which possess a membranaceous pe- ridium that forms large fragments and is not attached to the capillitium. . A close  TABLE 3.1 Differences Between the Traditional Classification of  the Myxomycetes (Five Orders Plus Ceratiomyxa) Found in Most  Published Monographs. 
 and Informal Groups (Named After the Genus  Unambiguously Assignable to the Group. .  Which is Listed First) Emerging  From Molecular Phylogenies Informal groups based on phylogenies Traditional classification Macromycetozoa  Protosporangiida (Ceratiomyxa) Order Ceratiomyxales  Myxogastria Class Myxogastria (Myxomycetes)   Dark-spored basal clade (Collumellidia)    Echinosteliid superclade (Echinostelium) Order Echinosteliales    Fuscisporoid superclade     Meridermid clade (Meriderma) Order Stemonitales p.p. .      Stemonitid clade (Stemonitis,  Comatricha) Order Stemonitales p.p. .      Lamprodermid clade (Lamproderma,  Didymium, Kelleromyxa, Physarum) Orders Physarales, Stemonitales p.p. 
  Bright-spored basal clade (Lucisporidia)    Cribrarioid superclade (Cribraria) Order Liceales p.p. .    Trichioid superclade      Reticularioid clade (Reticularia,  Lycogala, Tubifera) Order Liceales p.p. 
    Liceoid clade (Licea) Order Liceales p.p. .      Trichoid clade (Trichia, Dianema,  Dictydiaethalium) Order Trichiales, Order Liceales p.p. . For orientation, myxomycete genera with an isolated position or rich in species are listed. 
Source: Modified after Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., 2017. . Myxomycetes. . In : Archibald, J.M.,  Simpson, A.G.B., Slamovits, C.H., (Eds.) Handbook of the Protists. . Springer, New York. 
98     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology relationship of Lamproderma with members of the traditional order Physarales  may seem strange. 
 because it strongly contradicts the traditional classification. .  However   it is mainly the absence of lime in fruiting bodies that separates Lam- proderma and related genera from the Physarales. .  whereas the true peridium in  all species is thin and separated from the capillitium. 
The position (as well as the monophyly) of many genera in the dark-spored  myxomycetes remains problematic. .  since only a small proportion of species  has been involved in phylogenetic studies thus far. 
Examples include the large  genera Physarum and Badhamia. .  which are most likely to be paraphyletic. 
  FIGURE 3.2 Outline of a phylogeny of the myxomycetes. .  with the most important genera as- signed to major clades (author of the picture: D.V. . Leontyev) . 
1  Echinostelium; 2. . Barbeyella;  3. 
Clastoderma; 4. . Meriderma; 5. . Macbrideola; 6. 
Stemonitis; 7. . Symphytocarpus; 8. . Comatricha; 9. .  Paradiacheopsis; 10. . Enerthenema; 11. 
Brefeldia; 12. . Amaurochaete; 13. 
Stemonaria; 14. . Stemonitop- sis; 15. 
Lamproderma; 16. . Mucilago; 17. 
Didymium; 18. . Diachea; 19. . Diderma; 20. 
Lepidoderma; 21. .  Kelleromyxa; 22.Physarum; 23. 
Craterium; 24. . Leocarpus; 25. . Physarina; 26. 
Fuligo; 27. . Physarella;  28. 
Cribraria; 29. . Lindbladia; 30. . Licaethalium; 31. 
Alwisia; 32. . Lycogala; 33. . Tubifera; 34. . Reticu- laria; 35. 
Licea; 36  Dianema; 37. . Prototrichia; 38. . Calomyxa; 39. . Dictydiaethalium; 40. . Licea varia- bilis (shows affinities to Dianemataceae); 41. 
Arcyria; 42. . Hemitrichia; 43. . Trichia; 44. . Perichaena. . The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    99 as indicated by the partly independent markers SSU and LSU rDNA. 
 EF-1α    and ITS1 (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2012; Nandipati et al.. 
 2012)   or the position of  the monotypic genus Kelleromyxa. .  described originally as a species of Licea  (Licea fimicola). 
The latter seems to assume an isolated position among the  dark-spored myxomycetes, which inspired the description of the separate fam- ily Kelleromyxaceae for this genus (Erastova et al., 2013). . The phylogeny of bright-spored myxomycetes have been investigated by  Fiore-Donno et al. 
(2013)  Only a fraction of all species in this group (35) were  involved, but these represent 18 genera (about four fifths of the described gen- era). . Data from two molecular markers (18SrDNA and EF-1α), unambiguously  support a basal position of the family Cribrariaceae (Cribrarioid superclade,  Table 3.1, Fig. . 3.2), which does not correspond to the traditional position of the  Cribrariaceae in the order Liceales (Poulain et al., 2011). . This discovery pro- vided a strong argument for the revision of the order Liceales, which has been  believed to be artificial for a long time (Eliasson, 1977, 2017). 
A second part of the traditional Liceales (called Reticularioid clade in  Table 3.1, Fig. . 3.2) is composed of the genera Lycogala, Reticularia, and  Tubifera, which form a monophyletic clade in the phylogeny of Fiore-Donno  et al. . (2013), whereas Dictydiaethalium shows more affinities with the tradi- tional Trichiales (Leontyev et al., 2014a). 
Contrary to the suggestion of sev- eral taxonomists (e.g., Lister, 1894; Macbride, 1922; Torrend, 1907), the genus  Lycogala is not deeply separated from Tubifera and Reticularia. . The history of the genus Alwisia. .  with its single known species Alwisia  bombarda later synonymized with Tubifera. .  is a good example of a situation  in which molecular phylogenies may as well support the reerection of a ge- nus. 
Within the Reticulariaceae at least four subclades have been identified, and  these correspond to the genera Alwisia, Lycogala, Reticularia, and Tubifera  (Leontyev et al., 2014a,b, 2015). . 18S rDNA sequences indicate that Alwisia  should be separated from Tubifera and occupies a basal position within the Re- ticulariaceae (Leontyev et al., 2014a). . Three new species have been described  within Alwisia, forming together with the well-known A. 
bombarda a monophy- letic branch (Leontyev et al., 2014a,b). . A third (Liceoid) clade was represented in the study by Fiore-Donno et al. .  (2013) by four species in the genus Licea (Licea castanea, Licea marginata,  Licea parasitica, and Licea variabilis). 
However, only three of these support the  clade, whereas one (L. . variabilis) appears to have close affinities with the Tri- choid clade (Table 3.1, Fig. . 3 2)  This example shows that the monophyly of a  genus can only be established only if all described species are involved in a study. 
The Trichoid clade includes all of the bright-spored myxomycetes which  do not belong to the Cribrariaceae. .  Liceaceae. .  and Reticulariaceae and have  been traditionally considered as the members of the order Trichiales. 
 which at  the current stage of knowledge seems to be much more a natural group than the  undoubtedly paraphyletic Liceales. . However   the sequence of divergences in the  evolution of this group is not yet clear (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2013); it is more or  100     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology less clear only. 
 that the traditional Dianemataceae (Calomyxa. .  Dianema) plus  the genera Prototrichia and Dictydiaethalium seem to form a basal clade. . A  number of genera (examples are Arcyriatella, Calonema, and Minakatella) have  never been investigated with molecular markers. 
Perhaps due to their lack of any economic importance, myxomycetes are  probably one of the last major groups of eukaryotes whose diversity and phy- logeny have been studied by molecular methods. . The available molecular  phylogenies directed to disentangle major branches within the group (Fiore- Donno et al.. .  2005   2008   2009   2010   2012   2013; Nandipati et al.. 
 2012) have  provided evidence that the traditional five-order classification of myxomycetes  is nonnatural. . A growing number of case studies add data on the position and ver- ify or deny the monophyly of single families and genera. 
 including Kelleromyxa  (Erastova et al.. .  2013)   Reticulariaceae (Leontyev et al.. .  2014a  b   2015)   Peri- chaena (Walker et al.. .  2015)   and Echinosteliaceae (Kretzschmar et al.. .  2016)   With more molecular studies, a revised classification of myxomycetes, as out- lined in Fig. . 3.2, may soon be within reach. 
MORPHOLOGY VERSUS PHYLOGENY Even the limited phylogenetic data currently available support the conclusion  that some very conspicuous characters traditionally considered as important  for the classification of myxomycetes seem to have evolved several times inde- pendently. . The most prominent example is the trend toward compound fruiting  bodies. .  including the following stages: solitary sporocarps as fruiting bodies →  fascicled fruiting bodies (sharing a common stalk) → pseudoaethalia (individual  fruiting bodies still discernible) → aethalia (individual fruiting bodies indiscern- ible). . A good example outlined earlier provide the Reticulariaceae (excluding  Dictydiaethalium) with the sequence Alwisia → Tubifera → Reticularia. 
It may  be expected. .  that at least some of the genera that have been erected for species  with compound fruiting bodies may not be justified in the light of molecular  investigations. .  a likely example will be Cribraria (solitary sporocarps as fruit- ing bodies) and Lindbladia (pseudoaethalia). . Detailed investigations which in- clude as many species as possible need to be carried out to determine in which  cases these genera represent distinctive clades in phylogenetic trees. 
The trans- formation of the stalked forms to the sessile ones. .  followed by the formation  of pseudoaethalia and aethalia. .  along with a simultaneous change of the spore  dissemination type from the active mode (with the help of a capillitium) to the  passive mode (through rain and insects) may be a general tendency of morpho- logical evolution in the myxomycetes (Leontyev et al.. 
 2014c; Leontyev. .  2016b)  In contrast, we can expect that more inconspicuous characters, even including  some not yet discovered, may support a system based on molecular data. . An exam- ple is the structure of the peridium and its connection with the capillitium, which  supports the separation of Meriderma from Lamproderma (Poulain et al., 2011). 
 Similarly. .  hollow stalks filled with spore-like cells represent another. .  hitherto  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    101 overlooked. .  character that seems to support the inclusion of Trichia decipiens into  a modified genus Hemitrichia (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2013)  Such inconspicuous  characters may escape selective pressure. .  thus becoming somewhat independent  from variation in ecological conditions. .  whereas characters of the fruiting body  that affect the dispersal abilities of spores depend strongly upon the environment. 
 For these reasons. .  some of the most conspicuous characters in the myxomycetes  (such as type of fruiting body or the degree of stalk and capillitium development)  may be less suitable for supporting a natural system. . Due to the plasticity of char- acters that are under high selective pressure. 
 it can be expected that systematic  revisions of classical genera. .  which include more than just a few species will often  result in new generic affiliations for some of these species. . Currently, myxomycete taxonomy seems to have reached the same point at  which research on green plants and multicellular animals had arrived several de- cades ago. 
Molecular data have shattered the traditional system, which had been  accepted for more than a century. . However, these results are not yet sufficient  to construct a fully comprehensive new system down to the species level. 
Of  the apparently 1000 currently accepted species of myxomycetes. .  virtually all of  which were described on the basis of a morphospecies concept. 
 about 150 dark- spored and 70 bright-spored are represented by partial 18S rDNA sequences  (Feng and Schnittler. .  2017)   and complete SSU sequences are known for a much  smaller number of species. . For this reason. 
 new combinations for species names  should be postponed until the respective genus or family has been treated in a  monographic way by a combination of morphological and molecular methods. .  It will require time and continuous research efforts to develop a comprehensive  natural system of classification for the myxomycetes. 
The studies reviewed in  this chapter provide a starting point for such an effort. . REFERENCES Adl. 
 S M    Simpson   A G    Farmer   M A    Andersen   R A    Andersen   O R    Barta   J R    Bowser    S S    Brugerolle. .  G    Fensome   R A    Fredericq. 
 S    James   T Y    Karpov   S    Kugrens   P    Krug    J    Lane   C E    Lewis   L A    Lodge   J    Lynn   D H    Mann   D G    McCourt   R M    Mendoza   L     Moestrup. .  Ø    Mozley-Standridge. 
 S E    Nerad   T A    Shearer   C A    Smirnov   A V    Spiegel    F W    Taylor   M F J R    2005  The new higher level classification of eukaryotes with emphasis  on the taxonomy of Protists. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 399–451. 
 Adl   S M    Simpson   A G    Lane   C E    Lukeš   J L    Bass   D    Bowser   S S    Brown   M W    Burki    F    Dunthorn   M    Hampl   V    Heiss   A    Hoppenrath. .  M    Lara   E    Le Gall   L    Lynn   D H     McManus   H    Mitchell   E A D    Sharon   L    Mozley-Stanridge. .  E    Parfrey   L W    Pawlowski. 
  J    Rueckert   S    Shadwick   L    Schoch   C L    Smirnov   A    Spiegel   F W    2012  The revised  classification of Eukaryotes. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  59, 429–493. 
 Anonymous, 2013a. . Invisorb Spin Plant Mini Kit. . User Manual. 
Stratec Molecular GmbH, Berlin. .  Anonymous, 2013b. . MSB Spin PCRapace. . User manual. 
Stratec Molecular GmbH, Berlin. .  Anonymous, 2015. 
DNeasy Plant Handbook. . Quiagen N.V, Venlo. .  Baldauf, S.L., Doolittle, W.F., 1997. . Origin and evolution of the slime molds (Mycetozoa). . Proc   Natl  Acad  Sci  U S A  94, 12007–12012. 
 102     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Baldauf, S.L., Roger, A.J., Wenk-Siefert, I., Doolittle, W.F., 2000. . A kingdom-level phylogeny of  eukaryotes based on combined protein data. 
Science 290, 972–977. .  Bokov, K., Steinberg, S.V., 2009. 
A hierarchical model for evolution of 23S ribosomal RNA. . Nature  457, 977–980. .  Brown, M.W., Sharpe, S.C., Silberman, J.D., Heiss, A.A., Lang, B.F., Simpson, A.G., Roger, A.J.,  2013. . Phylogenomics demonstrates that breviate flagellates are related to opisthokonts and apu- somonads. 
Proc  R  Soc  Lond  280 (1769), 20131755. .  Burki, F., 2014. . The Eukaryotic Tree of Life from a global phylogenomic perspective. 
Cold Spring  Harb. . Perspect  Biol  6, a016147. .  Burki, F., Kaplan, M., Tikhonenkov, D.V., Zlatogursky, V., Minh, B.Q., Radaykina, L.V., Smirnov,  A., Mylnikov, A.P., Keeling, P.J., 2016. . Untangling the early diversification of eukaryotes: a  phylogenomic study of the evolutionary origins of Centrohelida, Haptophyta and Cryptista. 
 Proc  R  Soc  Lond  283 (1823), (pii: 20152802). .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 2009. 
Megaphylogeny, cell body plans, adaptive zones: causes and timing of  eukaryote basal radiations. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  56, 26–33   Cavalier-Smith, T., 2010. . Deep phylogeny, ancestral groups and the four ages of life. 
Philos  Trans   R  Soc  Lond  365, 111–132. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Early evolution of eukaryote feeding modes, cell structural diversity, and  classification of the protozoan phyla Loukozoa, Sulcozoa, and Choanozoa. . Eur  J  Protistol  49  (2), 115–178. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Chao, E., Kudryavtsev, A., Berney, C., Snell, E.A., Lewis,  R., 2015. 
Multigene phylogeny resolves deep branching of Amoebozoa. . Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol   83, 293–304. .  Crick, F.H., 1958. 
On protein synthesis. . Symp  Soc  Exp  Biol  12, 138–163. 
 Corda, A.C.J., 1837. . Icones Fungorum hucusque cognitorum. 
J  G  Calve, Praga. .  Eliasson, U., 1977. 
Recent advances in the taxonomy of myxomycetes. . Botanical Notes 130, 483–492. .  Eliasson, U., 2017. 
Review and remarks on current generic delimitations in the myxomycetes, with  special emphasis on Licea, Listerella and Perichaena. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 343–350. .  Erastova, D.A., Okun, M.V., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2013. 
Phylogenetic position of the  enigmatic myxomycete genus Kelleromyxa revealed by SSU rDNA sequences. . Mycol  Prog   12, 599–608. .  Farris, J.L., 1990. . Haeckel, history and Hull. 
Syst  Zool  39, 81–88   Feng, Y., Klahr, A., Janik, P., Ronikier, A., Hoppe, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2016. . What  an intron may tell: several sexual biospecies coexist in Meriderma spp. . (Myxomycetes). . Protist  167 (3), 234–253. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Sex or no sex? Independent marker genes and group I introns re- veal the existence of three sexual but reproductively isolated biospecies in Trichia varia  (Myxomycetes). . Org  Divers  Evol  15, 631–650. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2017. 
Molecular or morphological species? Myxomycete diversity in a  deciduous forest in northeastern Germany. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 359–380. .  Ferris, P.J., Vogt, V.M., Truitt, C.L., 1983. 
Inheritance of extrachromosomal rDNA in Physarum  polycephalum. . Mol  Cell  Biol  3 (4), 635–642. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Berney, C.J., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. 
Higher-order phylogeny of  plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA  gene sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 201–210. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Clissmann, F., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Two-gene  phylogeny of bright-spored Myxomycetes (slime moulds, superorder Lucisporidia). . PLoS  ONE 8, e62586. .  The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    103 Fiore-Donno, A.M., Haskins, E.F., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2009. . Semimorula liquescens  is a modified echinostelid myxomycete (Mycetozoa). . Mycologia 101, 773–776. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Fukui, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2012. .  18S rDNA phylogeny of Lamproderma and allied genera (Stemonitales, Myxomycetes, Amoe- bozoa). 
PLoS ONE 7, e35359. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Meyer, M., Baldauf, S.L., Pawlowski, J., 2008. 
Evolution of dark-spored myxo- mycetes (slime-molds): molecules versus morphology. . Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol  46, 878–889. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., Baldauf, S.,  2010. 
Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (Mycetozoa). . Protist 161, 55–70. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., 2011. . Genetic structure of two  protist species (Myxogastria, Amoebozoa) suggests asexual reproduction in sexual amoebae. 
 PLoS ONE 6, e22872. .  Fiz-Palacios, O., Romeralo, M., Ahmadzadeh, A., Weststrand, S., Ahlberg, P.E., Baldauf, S., 2013. 
 Did terrestrial diversification of amoebas (Amoebozoa) occur in synchrony with land plants?  PLoS ONE 8, e74374. .  Forterre, P., 2015. . The universal tree of life: an update. . Front  Microbiol  6, 717   Graur, D., Li, W.H., 2000. . Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution, second ed. 
Sinauer Associates,,  Sunderland MA. .  Haeckel, E., 1866. . Generelle Morphologie der Organismen: allgemeine Grundzüge der organisch- en Formen-Wissenschaft, mechanisch begründet durch die von Charles Darwin reformirte  Descendenz-Theorie, Berlin. 
Hall, B.G., 2011. . Phylogenetic Trees Made Easy. . A How-to Manual, fourth ed. 
Sinauer Associates,  Sunderland MA. .  Hagelstein, R., 1944. 
The Mycetozoa of North America. . Mineola, New York. 
 Hennig, W., 1966. . Phylogenetic Systematics. 
University of Illinois Press, Urbana. .  Johansen, S., Johansen, T., Haugli, F., 1992. 
Extrachromosomal ribosomal DNA of Didymium iri- dis: sequence analysis of the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene and sub-telomeric region. . Curr   Genet  22, 305–312. .  Kalyanasundaram, I., 1994. 
Occurrence of melanin in bright-spored myxomycetes. . Cryptogam   Mycol  15 (4), 229–237. .  Katoh, K., Misawa, K., Kuma, K., Miyata, T., 2002. 
MAFFT: a novel method for rapid multiple  sequence alignment based on fast Fourier transform. . Nucleic Acids Res. 
30 (14), 3059–3066. .  Kendrew, J.C., 1963. 
Mioglobin and the structure of proteins. . Science 139 (2), 1259–1266. .  Kimura, M., 1968. 
Evolutionary rate at the molecular level. . Nature 217 (5129), 624–626. .  Kretschmar, M., Kuhnt, A., Bonkowski, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., 2016. 
Phylogeny of the highly  divergent Echinosteliales (Amoebozoa). . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  63 (4), 453–459. .  Kusakin, O.G., Drozdov, A.L., 1994. . Phylema of the Organic World. 
Nauka, Sankt-Petersburg. .  Li, W.-H., 1997. . Molecular Evolution. 
Sinauer Associates, Sunderland MA. .  Leontyev, D.V., 2016a. 
Myxomycetes of the family Reticulariaceae: molecular phylogeny, mor- phology and systematics. . Thesis for Doctor of Science degree in Biology (Dr. . Sci  Biol )  M G   Kholodny Institute of Botany of the NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv (in Ukrainian). . Leontyev, D.V., 2016b. 
The evolution of sporophore in reticulariaceae (myxomycetes). . Ukr  Bot  J   73 (2), 178–184. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Moreno, G., Stephenson, S.L., Mitchell, D.W., Rojas, C., 2014a. 
 The genus Alwisia (Myxomycetes) revalidated, with two species new to science. . Mycologia  106, 936–948. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2014b. 
A new species of Alwisia (Myxomycetes)  from New South Wales and Tasmania. . Mycologia 106, 1212–1219. .  104     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2014c. . Pseudocapillitium or true capillitium? A  study of capillitial structures in Alwisia bombarda (myxomycetes). . Nova Hedwigia 99 (3–4),  441–451. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
A critical revision of the Tubifera ferrugi- nosa complex. . Mycologia 107, 959–985. .  Linnaeus, C., 1758. . Systema naturæ per regna tria naturæ, secundum classes, ordines, genera, spe- cies, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis. 
Laurentius Salvius, Stockholm. .  Lister, A., 1894. . A Monograph of the Mycetozoa. 
British Museum, London. .  Lister, A., 1911. . A Monograph of the Mycetozoa, second ed. 
(revised by G. . Lister)  British Museum,  London. . Lister, A., 1925. . A Monograph of the Mycetozoa, third ed. 
(revised by G. . Lister)  British Museum,  London. 
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Kaiser, Ch.A., Krieger, M., Bretscher, A., Ploegh, H., Amon, A., Scott, M.P.,  2012. . Molecular Biology of the Cell, seventh ed. 
Routledge, New York. .  Loytynoja, A., Goldman, N., 2008. . Phylogeny-aware gap placement prevents errors in sequence  alignment and evolutionary analysis. 
Science 320, 1632–1635. .  Macbride, T.H., 1922. . The North-American Slime Molds. 
McMillan Co, New York. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
Iowa Univ  Press, Iowa City. .  Martin, M.P., Lado, C., Johansen, S., 2003. 
Primers are designed for amplification and direct se- quencing of ITS region of rDNA from myxomycetes. . Mycologia 95, 474–479. .  Mayr, E., 1963. . Animal Species and Evolution. 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cam- bridge. .  Nandipati, S.C., Haugli, K., Coucheron, D.H., Haskins, E.F., Johansen, S.D., 2012. 
Polyphyletic  origin of the genus Physarum (Physarales, Myxomycetes) revealed by nuclear rDNA mini- chromosome analysis and group I intron synapomorphy. . BMC Evol  Biol  12, 166   Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1991. 
A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes (Feest A., E. . Burgraff  De  Nederlandse Myxomyceten, Engl. 
transl )  Biopress Ltd., Bristol. . Nei, M., Kumar, S., 2000. . Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics. 
Oxford University Press,  New York. .  Olive, L.S., 1975. . The Mycetozoans. 
Academic Press, New York. .  Postel, E., 2014. . Two gene phylogeny of the genus Tubifera (Myxomycetes): Phylogeny of the  protein elongation factor EF1α. 
Bachelor thesis. . Ernst Moritz Arndt University, Department  of Biology, Greifswald. . Poulain, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. 
Les myxomycetes. . Fédération Mycologique et Bota- nique Dauphiné-Savoie. 
Raunkiær, C., 1888–89. . Myxomycetes Daniae eller Danmarks Slimsvampe. . Botanisk Tidsskrift  17, 20–105. .  Root-Bernstein, M., Root-Bernstein, R., 2015. 
The ribosome as a missing link in the evolution of  life. . J  Theor  Biol  367, 130–158. .  Ross, I.K., 1973. 
The Stemonitomycetidae, a new subclass of Myxomycetes. . Mycologia 65,  477–485. .  Rostafinski, J.H., 1875. . Sluzowce (Mycetozoa). . Monografia, Paris. 
 Ruggiero, M.A., Gordon, D.P., Orrell, T.M., Bailly, N., Bourgoin, T., Brusca, R.C., Cavalier-Smith,  T., Guiry, M.D., Kirk, P.M., 2015. . A higher level classification of all living organisms. 
PLoS  ONE 10 (4), e0119248. .  Rundquist, B.A., Gott, J.M., 1995. 
RNA editing of the coI mRNA throughout the life cycle of Phy- sarum polycephalum. . Mol  Genet  247 (3), 306–311. .  Sambrook, M.R., Green, J., 2012. . Molecular Cloning, fourth ed. . Cold Spring Harbor, New York. 
 The Phylogeny of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 3    105 Schnittler, M., Shchepin, O., Dagamac, N.H.A., Borg Dahl, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2017. . Barcod- ing myxomycetes with molecular markers: challenges and opportunities. 
Nova Hedwigia 104,  183–209. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2000. . Ultrastructure of Barbeyella minutissima  (Myxomycetes). 
Karstenia 40, 159–166. .  Shadwick, L.L., 2011. 
Systematics of Protosteloid amoebae. . Theses and Dissertations. . 221  Shadwick, L.L., Spiegel, F.W., Shadwick, J.D., Brown, M.W., Silberman, J.D., 2009. 
Eumyceto- zoa = Amoebozoa? SSUrDNA phylogeny of protosteloid slime molds and its significance for  the amoebozoan supergroup. . PLoS ONE 4, e6754. .  Smit, S., Widmann, J., Knight, R., 2007. 
Evolutionary rates vary among rRNA structural ele- ments. . Nucleic Acids Res. 
35 (10), 3339–3354. .  Smith, L.M., Sanders, J.Z., Kaiser, R.J., Hughes, P., Dodd, C., Connell, C.R., Heiner, C., Kent, S.B.,  Hood, L.E., 1986. 
Fluorescence detection in automated DNA sequence analysis. . Nature 321  (6071), 674–679. .  Spang, A., Saw, J.H., Jørgensen, S.L., Zaremba-Niedzwiedzka, K., Martijn, J., Lind, A.E., van Eijk,  R., Schleper, C., Guy, L., Ettema, T.J.G., 2015. 
Complex Archaea that bridge the gap between  prokaryotes and eukaryotes. . Nature 521, 173–179. .  Spiegel, F.W., 1990. 
Phylum plasmodial slime molds: Class Protostelids. . In: Margulis, L., Corliss,  J.O., Melkonian, M.J., Chapman, D. . (Eds.), Handbook of Protoctista. 
Jones and Bartlett Pub- lishers Inc, Boston, pp. . 484–497   Spiegel, F.W., 1991. 
A proposed phylogeny of the flagellated protostelids. . BioSystems 25, 113–120. .  Steitz, T.A., 2008. 
A structural understanding of the dynamic ribosome machine. . Nat  Rev  Mol   Cell Biol. 
9, 242–253. .  Torrend, C., 1907. 
Les Myxomycètes. . Broteria VI (II), 5–349. .  Torres-Machorro, A.L., Hernández, R., Cevallos, A.M., López-Villasenˇor, I., 2010. . Ribosomal  RNA genes in eukaryotic microorganisms: witnesses of phylogeny? FEMS Microbiol. 
Rev   34, 59–86. .  Vogt, V.R., Braun, R., 1976. 
Structure of ribosomal DNA in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Mol  Biol   106, 567–587. .  Walker, L.M., Leontyev, D.V., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
Perichaena longipes, a new myxomycete  from the Neotropics. . Mycologia 107 (5), 1012–1022. .  Walsh, P.S., Metzger, D.A., Higuchi, R., 1991. 
Chelex 100 as a medium for simple extraction of  DNA for PCR-based typing from forensic material. . BioTechniques 10 (4), 506–513. .  Wikmark, O.G., Haugen, P., Lundblad, E.W., Haugli, K., Johansen, S.D., 2007. 
The molecular evo- lution and structural organization of group I introns at position 1389 in nuclear small subunit  rDNA of myxomycetes. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  54, 49–56   Woese, C., 1990. . Towards a natural system of organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea, Bacte- ria, and Eucarya. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U S A  87 (15), 4576–4579. .  Yatchevskiy, A.A., 1907. 
Mycological flora of European and Asian Russia. . The Slime MoldsRichter,  Moscow. .  Zmitrovich, I.V., 2010. 
Epimorphology and tectomorphology of higher fungi. . Folia Cryptogamica  Petropolitana 5, 272. .  FURTHER READING Burki, F., Shalchian-Tabrizi, K., Minge, M., 2007. 
Phylogenomics reshuffles the eukaryotic super- groups. . PLoS ONE 2 (8), 790. 
 106     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Cavalier-Smith, T., Chao, E.E-Y., Oates, B., 2004. . Molecular phylogeny of Amoebozoa and the  evolutionary significance of the unikont Phalansterium. 
Eur  J  Protistol  40, 21–48   Hoppe, T., Kutschera, U., 2010. . In the shadow of Darwin: Anton de Bary’s origin of myxomy- cetology and a molecular phylogeny of the plasmodial slime molds. . Theory Biosci. 
129,  15–23. .  Kitching, I.J., Forey, P.L., Humphries, C.J., Williams, D.M., 2000. 
Cladistics: The Theory and Prac- tice of Parsimony Analysis, second ed. . University Press, Oxford, pp. . 228   Lado, C., Pando, F., 1997. 
Flora Mycologica Iberica. . vol  2: Myxomycetes, I. . Ceratiomyxales, Echi- nosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. . Real Jardín Botánico, J. 
Cramer, Madrid. . Lado, C., 2005–2016. 
An on line nomenclatural information system of Eumycetozoa. . Available  from: http://www.nomen.eumycetozoa.com Massee, G., 1892. . A Monograph of the Myxogasteres. 
Methuen & Co, London. .  McNiel, J., Barrie, F.R., Buck, W.R., Demoulin, V., Greuter, W., (Eds.), 2011. . International Code of  Nomenclature for Algae, Fungi, and Plants (Melbourne Code). . Regnum Vegetabile, vol. . 154   Koeltz Scientific Books, Melbourne. . Ride, W.D.L., Cogger, H.G., Dupuis, C., Kraus, O., Minelli, A. . (Eds.), 1999. 
International Code of  Zoological Nomenclature. . fourth ed  The Natural History Museum, London. .  Schnittler, M., 2001. 
Ecology of Myxomycetes from a winter-cold desert in western Kazakhstan. .  Mycologia 93, 653–669. .  Stephenson, S.L., 2003. 
Myxomycetes of New Zealand. . Fungi of New Zealand, vol. . 3, Fungal  Diversity Press, Hong Kong. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity and distribution  from the fossil record to the present. . Biodivers  Conserv  17, 285–301. .  107 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00004-4 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 4 Genomics and Gene Expression  in Myxomycetes Dennis Miller, Ramesh Padmanabhan, Subha N. . Sarcar University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX, United States INTRODUCTION The Physarum genome consists of several types of DNA. . Early studies of the  DNA content of the haploid nucleus indicated the presence of about 40–45 chro- mosomes (Mohberg. 
 1977) with an average length of 6–7 Mb. .  giving a chromo- somal DNA content of the haploid nucleus of 240–315 Mb. . In addition to the  nuclear chromosomes, in the nucleolus the rDNA genes are located on 60 kb ex- trachromosomal “minichromosomes” (Ferris, 1985; Ferris and Vogt, 1982; Vogt  and Braun, 1976). . There are approximately 150 of these minichromosomes per  nucleus, thus adding about 9 Mb to the nuclear DNA content. . Consistent with  these observations. 
 the DNA content of the Physarum haploid nucleus was de- termined to be about 0.3 pg. .  or about 290 Mb (Melera. 
 1980; Mohberg. .  1977;  Mohberg and Rusch. .  1971; Mohberg et al.. 
 1973)  In addition to the nuclear  DNA content. .  the DNA within mitochondria (mtDNA) contributes an additional  24 Mb of DNA (400 copies of a 60 kb mtDNA per nucleus; Bohnert et al.. 
 1975;  Braun and Evans. .  1969; Evans. .  1966; Evans and Suskind. .  1971; Guttes and  Guttes. 
 1969)  Of the total DNA content of Physarum about 10% is mtDNA,  about 5% is minichromosome (rDNA), and about 85% is chromosomal DNA. . NUCLEOLAR DNA: MINICHROMOSOMES rDNA GENES The nucleolar minichromosome or extrachromosomal rDNA molecule in  Physarum polycephalum is about 60 kb in length (Ferris. 
 1985; Ferris and  Vogt. .  1982; Vogt and Braun. 
 1976)  There are about 150 copies of the rDNA  minichromosome, constituting about 9 Mb or about 5% of the nuclear DNA  (Hardman, 1985). . This DNA is more G + C-rich than chromosomal DNA (or  mitochondrial DNA) and forms a satellite band in CsCl–Bisbenzimide den- sity gradients. 
Each minichromosome contains two rDNA transcription units  108     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology oriented as inverted repeats. . The rDNA molecule itself consists of two 29.6 kb  inverted repeats, each with one rDNA transcription unit about 13.3 kb in length. .  The rDNA transcription units are divergently transcribed in a direction away  from the central axis of symmetry toward the termini. . The transcription units  are separated by about 22 kb, consisting of two 11 kb tandem inverted repeats. 
 This region contains the origins of replication where rDNA replication initi- ates and proceeds bidirectionally from the origin. . Each 11 kb region has two  origins of replication for a total of four origins per rDNA molecule. . On aver- age, only one of these origins is initiated in each mitotic cycle, resulting in a  doubling of the number of rDNA molecules in each cycle. . Replication of the  rDNA molecule occurs in the last two-thirds of S-phase and all of G2-phase. .  An untranscribed region of about 5 kb is located at each terminus (Ferris, 1985;  Ferris and Vogt, 1982; Hardman, 1985; Vogt and Braun, 1976). 
The termini  (telomeres) of the minichromosome are somewhat variable in length and are  composed of six-nucleotide repeats identical in sequence to the chromosomal  telomeres in Physarum and to the human telomere repeats generated by the  telomerase (Forney et al.. .  1987)  The identical rDNA transcription units produce a 45S polycistronic rDNA  primary transcript, which is processed into the 19S rRNA, 5.8S rRNA, and  26S rRNA. . The transcription unit is arranged: 5′. .  TIS (transcription initia- tion site). .  ETS (external transcribed spacer). 
 19S rRNA   ITS1 (internal tran- scribed spacer 1). .  5.8S rRNA. 
 ITS2 (internal transcribed spacer 2). .  26S rRNA    3′ (Hardman. .  1985)  Group I introns have been found in the 19S and 26S  rRNAs (Ferris, 1985; Ferris and Vogt, 1982; Gubler et al., 1979; Nandipati  et al., 2012). . These “self-splicing” group I introns have been shown to be mo- bile elements that readily “home” to rDNA sequences (Johansen et al.. 
 1992;  Muscarella and Vogt. .  1989; Muscarella et al.. .  1990; Nandipati et al.. 
 2012)   Due to this mobility, there is variation in the presence and type of group I  intron found in rDNAs of Physarum and other myxomycetes. . This variation  has been exploited to develop robust phylogenies of myxomycetes (Chapter 3  and Nandipati et al., 2012). 
CHROMOSOMES AND CHROMOSOMAL DNA The chromosomal DNA consists of about 270 Mb of DNA in the form of about  40 chromosomes. . The genetic complexity of the chromosomal DNA is signifi- cantly smaller (about 200 Mb) due to the large amount of moderately and highly  repetitive DNA sequences present. 
This has made sequence analysis and as- sembly unusually difficult. . Abundant highly repetitive DNA sequences. 
 which  are pyrimidine-rich. .  contain mononucleotide and dinucleotide repeats. 
 are orga- nized in long tandem clusters. .  and are located in intergenic regions at numerous  sites and within introns. . The large amount of these highly repetitive sequences  has prevented complete assembly of chromosome sequences. . As some of  these highly repetitive sequences are located in introns, even the assembly   Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    109 of genes can be problematic. 
Single-copy sequences constitute about 190 Mb  (about 70% of the chromosomal DNA). . These single-copy sequences have been  sequenced and assembled into 69,687 scaffolds with an N50 scaffold length of  54,474 kb (Schaap et al., 2016; 10.0 draft assembly). 
Contaminating sequences  and contigs shorter than 200 bp have been removed from the sequences submit- ted to GenBank. . The sequences in GenBank constitute 7707 scaffolds with a  median length of about 6500 bp. . These scaffolds range in length from about  1,500 to 648,085 bp. . The fact that the longest scaffold length (about 0.65 Mb)  is only about 10% of the chromosome length bears witness to the large number  of sites containing highly repetitive sequences. 
Chromosome Number and Telomeres Based on microscopic studies. .  the haploid chromosome number has been vari- ously reported as 40–43. .  with a diploid number of about 90 and an average  molecular weight per chromosome of 4 × 109 Da (about 6 Mb) (Mohberg. .  1977)    although there have been reports that the chromosome number varies (Adler and  Holt. 
 1974; McCullough et al.. .  1973; Mohberg. .  1977; Mohberg et al.. .  1973)  indicating nuclear instability. . Forney et al. 
(1987) reported that the telomeres  on Physarum chromosomes are typical six-nucleotide repeats that happen to  be identical to the six-nucleotide repeats on human chromosome telomeres  (5′-TTAGGG-3′). . A search of the “Physarum V10 NCBI supercontigs wo  bacteria” (http://www.Physarum-blast.ovgu.de) with 7 tandem repeats of  5′-TTAGGG-3′ identifies 78 scaffolds with these sequences. 
 consistent with a  haploid chromosome number of about 40. . As expected for telomere sequenc- es, 33 of the 78 scaffolds had the tandem repeats at the end of the scaffold  sequence. . 5′-TTAGGG-3′ repeats were found at the 3′ end of the scaffold  sequence in 17 scaffolds; while 5′-CCCTAA-3′ repeats were found at the 5′  end of the scaffold sequence in 13 scaffolds. .  indicating that the structure of  Physarum chromosomes is: ′ ′ ′ ′ (5 - CCCTAA -3 ) -----------------(5 - TTAGGG-3 ) n n ′ ′ ′ ′ (3 - GGGATT-5 ) -----------------(3 - AATCCC-5 ) n n One small scaffold contained only repeats of these sequences (32 repeats)  and appears to be a telomere fragment. 
Surprisingly, 45 (58%) scaffolds had  repeats of these sequences located internally within the scaffold. . It is not clear  if these internal sequences are naturally occurring or an artifact of sequence  assembly. . It is possible that these sequences have been internalized through  some mechanism and have become internal repetitive elements. . It is also pos- sible that the similarity of these sequences has resulted in incorrect assembly of  these sequences. 
If the internal sequences in these scaffolds are fused telomeres. .   then the number of unique telomeres would increase to 123 (45 × 2 = 90 + 33). 
  110     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology which is consistent with about 62 chromosomes. . In 13 scaffolds there are 2  separate tandem repeat sequences, and in 1 scaffold there are 3 separate tandem  repeat sequences. . One or both of these sequence repeats can be internal, and for  one scaffold, the two tandem repeats are located at each terminus. 
These repeats  are separated by as little as three nucleotides and as much as 4484 bp. . The number of repeating units range from 5 (the lowest number of repeats  that could be detected by a search) to 39 (although these 39 repeats were in- ternal and may have been a fusion of 2 smaller terminal repeats). . The largest  number of repeats located at the terminus of the scaffold is 37. . The majority of  the internal repeats range from 5 to 7 repeat sequences, a number smaller than  predicted from the fusion of terminal sequences that average about 20 repeating  units. 
Gene Content and Chromosomal DNA Schaap et al. . (2016) used gene prediction algorithms and transcriptome data  to identify the number of protein coding genes in the 188.75 Mb of unique  chromosomal DNA. . These authors defined 34,438 genes. 
These genes were as- sembled using transcriptome data that identified numerous small spliceosomal  introns. . The number of introns was predicted to be 676,387 with an average size  of 231 bp giving about 20 introns per gene (Schaap et al., 2016). 
Analysis of the gene content of Physarum chromosomes reveals a remark- able sophistication (Schaap et al., 2016). . A number of genes coding for sensory  and regulatory proteins characterized in animals and yeast are also found in  Physarum. . Genes coding for proteins, such as tyrosine kinases, and cAMP and  cGMP proteins that are involved in regulatory and developmental processes in  animals have obvious analogs in Physarum. 
The Mitochondrial RNA Polymerase Gene. .  an Example of Protein  Coding Genes on Nuclear DNA The mitochondrial RNA polymerase gene (rpoM) produces a single subunit  protein of 998 amino acids (Miller et al.. .  2006)  The gene is located in NCBI  scaffold 1,548 (20,895 nucleotides). 
Initiation of transcription occurs 21 nucle- otides downstream of a putative TATA box (AAATAAAA) and 138 nucleotides  upstream of the AUG translational initiation codon (after removal of a 1520  nucleotide intron). . The theoretical primary transcript would have a length of  over 11,500 nucleotides. 
The mature. .  processed transcript from cDNA analysis  is 3162 nucleotides (27% of the theoretical primary transcript) with a 138 nu- cleotide 5′ untranslated sequence and a 30 nucleotide 3′ untranslated sequence  flanking a protein coding region of 2994 nucleotides (998 codons). . A consensus  sequence cleavage site for polyA addition (AATAAA) is located 14 nucleo- tides downstream of the TAA (UAA in RNA) termination codon and 10–14  nucleotides upstream of the site of polyA addition. . (The actual site of polyA  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    111 addition is ambiguous. .  since it occurs before or within a string of four As in the  coding sequence.) A comparison of the amino acid sequence inferred from the  codons of the open reading frame using the classical genetic code produces 12  consensus sequences highly conserved in all mitochondrial RNA polymerases  (mtRNAP 1a. .  1b   2   3a   3b   4   5   6   7   8   9   10; Miller et al.. 
 2006)  This indicates  that Physarum has a standard genetic code. . Interrupting the protein coding se- quence are 15 introns that appear to be spliceosomal introns. . These 15 introns  define 16 exons. 
The size of the exons ranges from 90 nucleotides (E10) to 693  nucleotides (E4). . Thirteen of the 16 exons are between 90 and 180 nucleotides. .  The remaining 3 exons (E4, E12, E13) are significantly larger with 693, 422,  and 306 nucleotides, respectively. 
The 15 introns range in size from 51 nucleotides (I14) to over 5600 nucleo- tides (I8). . The introns can be put into three size groups. . These are (1) 50–200  nucleotides (8 introns), (2) 300–600 nucleotides (4 introns), and (3) 800–5600  nucleotides (3 introns, I1, I8, and I12). 
The introns appear to be spliceosomal,  since all of the introns have spliceosomal-like consensus sequences located at  the intron boundaries. . These consensus sequences are not identical to the clas- sic GT-AG spliceosomal intron consensus sequences, but are quite similar. 
The  5′ GT and the 3′ AG seem to be absolutely conserved. . The consensus sequence  for the 15 introns is: ′ ′ 5 - Rg|GTAt- - - - - - - - - -aCAG|R-3 where | is the intron/exon boundary and R is a purine (A/G). . The lowercase g, a,  and t indicate G, A, and T nucleotides that are less conserved in the consensus  sequence. . This consensus sequence is similar to the consensus determined by  Glockner et al. 
(2008) for 30 splicing donor/acceptor sites in Physarum. . Beyond the boundary consensus sequences, the interior of the introns have  highly repetitive simple sequences. . These sequences vary among the introns  present. 
They include very CT-rich sequences (I1. .  I2   I3   I6   I7)   very AT-rich  sequences (I8. .  I9)   very GA-rich sequences (I3). .  GT-rich sequences (I12). 
 long  stretches of C nucleotides (I5. .  I8   I13)   or long stretches of T nucleotides (I4. .   I9   I12)  These sequences are arranged as homopolymers. .  such as C20 (I13)  or T15 (I4). 
 alternating homopolymers. .  such as (GT)112 (I12) or more com- plex sequences. .  for example. 
 [T2–6 (CT)2–4 C2–9]6 followed by [A(UC)1–7]16 in   intron 1. . As might be expected, these highly repetitive simple sequences are not sta- ble. . While the exons are relatively conserved and the sites of introns are con- served. .  the content of the introns beyond the consensus sequences can vary  dramatically in sequence and length between different genera of myxomycetes. . The sequence of the mtRNAP gene of Fuligo septica in the region cor- responding to Introns I13, I14, and I15 in P. 
polycephalum has been de- termined. . Comparison of these sequences show that the exon sequences are  quite conserved, but that the intron sequences vary dramatically. . Intron I13   112     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology (121 nucleotides in Physarum) is absent in Fuligo. .  and introns I14 (51 nucleo- tides in Physarum) and I15 (163 nucleotides in Physarum). .  while at the same  relative positions in the gene. .  have different length and completely different se- quences. 
I14 in Physarum is 51 nucleotides long and contains a long stretch (20  nucleotides) of C homopolymer. .  while the Fuligo intron at the analogous posi- tion is 106 nucleotides in length and is CT-rich with multiple tandem repeats  of CT and CTT. . I15 in Physarum is at least 163 nucleotides long and contains  a long stretch (greater than 38 nucleotides) of an A homopolymer. .  while the  Fuligo intron at the analogous position is 223 nucleotides in length and contains  several long T homopolymer stretches. 
SMALL, NONCODING RNAs In addition to protein coding genes, numerous small noncoding RNAs have  been identified in the Physarum nuclear genome. . These include tRNAs, and 5S  rRNAs, spliceosomal RNAs (U1, U2, U4, U5, U6), sno RNAs, and lnc RNAs. .  Hall and Braun (1977) predicted that about 270 5S rRNA genes were present on  Physarum chromosomes. .  and thus far. 
 15 full-length genes for 5S rRNA have  been identified on 15 separate scaffolds (Schaap et al.. .  2016)  tRNA genes were identified at 319 locations on 308 scaffolds. . Eleven  pairs of the putative tRNA genes were located on the same scaffold and so  are probably linked. . Spacing between the linked tRNA genes varies between  17 and 5375 nucleotides. 
Ten of the pairs are separated by less than 500 bp. .  Two of the linked pairs have the same anticodon (Leu both with IAG and Gly  both with GCC) and the third pair is presumably of the same isotype (Tyr)  but has different anticodons (IUA and GUA). . All of the other linked pairs are  different isotypes. 
tRNA Gene Structure Of the 319 tRNA genes identified, 295 have standard structure and have been  assigned an isotype based on their anticodon. . Twenty-four of the putative  tRNA genes lack the potential for standard tRNA structure and have been ten- tatively designated as tRNA pseudogenes. 
Six tRNA genes appear to code for  tRNAs with an anticodon 5′-UCA-3′, which recognizes the 5′-UGA-3′ stan- dard termination codon and have been tentatively assigned as selenocysteine  tRNAs. . Twenty-six of the tRNA genes have potential introns in the anticodon  loop of the tRNA. . Each potential intron is located two nucleotides 3′ of the  anticodon. . tRNA intron sizes ranged from 10 to 30 nucleotides, except for the  potential intron in one tRNA (Arg UCU) which is 205 nucleotides. . The 26  potential introns are located in 9 different isoacceptors (Ile, Gly, Tyr, Gln, Arg,  Ala, Lys, Leu, and Sec) with 11 different anticodon types. 
Multiple tRNAs  (2–7) from 6 of the anticodon types had introns, but in no case did every  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    113 tRNA within an anticodon type have introns. . tRNAs with introns within an  anticodon type might have the same intron or different introns. . For example,  seven tRNA isoacceptors (Tyr GUA) each had an intron of the same length  (10 nucleotides) at the same position, 2 nucleotides 3′ of the anticodon. 
Four  of the introns had the same sequence and two others were close variants of  this sequence with one or two nucleotide differences. . The seventh 10-nucleo- tide intron sequence was not related to the other 6, and 2 tRNAs with this  anticodon did not have an intron. . Of the 9 tRNAs (Ala) with 5′-UGC-3′ as  the anticodon, 4 had introns of 26–30 nucleotides and 5 had no intron. . The  four introns were similar in length and identical near the 5′ and 3′ boundary  sequences, but variable in the central portion of the intron. 
tRNA Anticodons, Codon/Anticodon   Interactions, and the Genetic Code Of the 64 possible anticodon sequences, 51 have been observed. . Analysis of  these anticodons can provide information about the genetic code, and the na- ture of codon–anticodon interactions (wobble rules) in Physarum. . Assuming  that all A nucleotides at the 5′ position of the anticodon are deaminated to  Inosine, the 5′ position of the anticodons should be I, G, U, or C. . The 13 an- ticodons that are not observed are: IAA (Phe), GAU (Ile), ICU (Ser), GGC  (Ala), IUA (Tyr), ICA (Cys), IUG (His), IUC (Asp), IUU (Asn), ICC (Gly),  GCG (Arg), UUA (term), and CUA (term). 
The observation of a tRNA with a  UAU anticodon that could potentially interact with both the AUG (Met) codon  and the AUA (Ile) codon through wobble base pairing interactions as it can in  E. . coli, argues that a U at the 5′ position of an anticodon will not wobble base  pair with a G at the 3′ position in codons. . The absence of anticodons with an  I at the 5′ position in two-codon families (IAA. .  IUA   ICA   IUG   IUU   IUC    ICU) argues that I can base pair with U. 
 C   or A at the 3′ position in codons  similar to E. . coli  The presence of tRNAs in two-codon families with only G  at the 5′ position of the anticodon (GAA. .  GUA   GCA   GUG   GUU   GCU    GUC) indicates that G at the 5′ position in anticodons is able to base pair  with U or C at the 3′ position in codons. . A C at the 5′ position of anticodons  must be specific to a G at the 3′ position of the codon, since AUG (Met) and  UGG (Trp) codons are recognized specifically by CAU and CCA. . The absence  of anticodons (UUA. .  CUA) that would recognize termination codons (UAA. .   UAG) is consistent with the observation that Physarum has a standard. 
 classi- cal genetic code. .  since there are not normally tRNAs with anticodons that will  recognize termination codons. . The one exception to this is the presence of six  tRNA genes that will produce tRNAs with UCA in the anticodon. . These tRNAs  would be expected to compete with termination factors that recognize the UGA  termination codon. . It is likely that these tRNA are charged with selenocysteine. .   rather than cysteine or tryptophan. 
 and that they are minor tRNAs that compete  114     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology weakly with termination factors for UGA. . These considerations argue that the  codon/anticodon (wobble) rules for Physarum are: 5′ position of anticodon 3′ position of codon I U. .  C   A G U   C U A C G These codon/anticodon (wobble) rules are different from either E. 
coli  (Crick, 1966) or S. . cerevisiae (Guthrie and Abelson, 1982). 
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA IN MYXOMYCETES The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of the myxomycetes is among the most com- plex found in any eukaryote in terms of its potential gene complement and the  expression of the mitochondrial genes through a novel type of RNA editing that  is both unique to the myxomycetes and seems to be a common feature of all  myxomycetes studied. . The prototype mtDNA of the myxomycetes is the mtDNA  of P. 
polycephalum. . It has a genetic complexity of about 60 kbp (although this  varies among P. . polycephalum strains from 56 kb to over 70 kb) and has a cir- cular restriction enzyme map (Jones et al., 1990). . Electron microscopy has been  used to detect 60 kbp circular DNA in Physarum mtDNA isolates indicating  that the mtDNA in Physarum is physically circular rather than arranged as long  tandem repeats (Bohnert. .  1977)  Variations of this single circular mtDNA may  be present in other myxomycetes (variation in the structure of the mtDNA from  different strains of Physarum). . There are about 400 copies of the mtDNA per  haploid genome making the mtDNA a moderately repetitive DNA element in the  Physarum genome, constituting about 8% of the total DNA content of Physarum. .  This DNA along with nuclear DNA sequences (especially the rDNA sequences  that are also moderately repetitive) have been useful in developing myxomy- cete phylogenies (Fiore-Dunno et al.. 
 2005; Krishnan et al.. .  2007) and establish- ing the relationship of the myxomycetes among the other eukaryotic organisms  (Miller. 
 2014; see later). . The Relationship of Myxomycetes Relative to Other Clades in the  Amoebozoa Based on Mitochondrial DNA Characteristics Amoebozoa is a supergroup of eukaryotes that unifies the slime molds (in- cluding the myxomycetes). .  archamoebae. .  and lobose amoeba (Cavalier- Smith. .  1998; Cavalier-Smith et al.. 
 2015)  The monophylyl of the Amoebozoa  is supported by molecular phylogenies based on small subunit rRNA genes  (Bolivar et al.. .  2001; Fahrni et al.. .  2003; Milyutina et al.. .  2001) and combined  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    115 analyses of protein sequences (Arisue et al.. 
 2002; Baldauf et al.. .  2000; Bapteste  et al.. .  2002; Forget et al.. 
 2002)  The Amoebozoa supergroup branches with  the common ancestor of animals and fungi (Opisthokonts), which is thought  to constitute a monophyletic group (Unikonts). . These molecular phylogenies  indicate that the Amoeboezoa is composed of two related, but anciently diver- gent groups, the Lobosea and Conosea. . The Conosea include archamoebae  (genera Entamoeba and Mastigamoeba). 
 the acellular (plasmodial) slime molds  (Myxomyecetes). .  the cellular slime molds (Dictyostellids). .  Group 1 protoste- lids. 
 Cavostellids. .  Filamoebae. .  and Schizoplasmodiids. . The Lobosea include  Tubulinea, Thecamoeba, Acanthamoebids, Vannellids, and Dactylopodida  (Katz, 2012; Shadwick et al., 2009). . Mitochondrial DNAs (mtDNAs) have been sequenced from a number of  representative organisms from the Amoebozoa (Gray et al., 2004; Miller, 2014). 
 In the Conosea. .  the archamoeba are amitochondriate or contain relict mitochon- dria (Aguilera et al.. .  2008; Gill et al.. .  2007; Roger and Simpson. 
 2008)   but the  complete sequence of the mtDNA of the prototype organism of the myxomyce- tes. .  P  polycephalum. .  has been reported (Takano et al.. 
 2001) and the mtDNA of  the closely related myxomycete. .  Didymium iridis. 
 has been partially sequenced  (Hendrickson and Silliker. .  2010a  b; Kopp   2012; Traphagen et al.. 
 2010)   mtDNAs from two dictyostelid genera have been completely sequenced. . These  are Dictyostelium discoideum (Ogawa et al., 2000) and Polysphondylium palli- dum (Burger et al., unpublished data). . Portions of the mtDNA from several oth- er species of Dictyostelium (D. 
citrinum, D. . muceroides, and D. . fasciculatum)  have also been sequenced (Bullerwell et al., 2010). . Two representative mtDNAs  have been sequenced from the Lobosea. 
 Acanthamoeba castellani. .  the proto- type of the acanthamoebids (Burger et al.. .  1995)   and Hartmanella veriformis. .  a  representative of the Tubulinea (Burger et al.. .  unpublished data). 
The mtDNAs  from Physarum, Dictyostelium, and Acanthamoeba have a number of features  in common but also display some fundamental differences. . Based on nuclear  SSU rRNA gene sequence comparisons, a schematic molecular phylogeny of  these three Amoebozoans is shown in Fig. . 4 1A  Surprisingly, based on mtD- NA features discussed later, a different phylogenetic topology can be inferred  (Fig. . 4 1B)  Using these mtDNA features as evolutionary criteria. .  myxomyce- tes appear to be related to. 
 but anciently divergent from. .  the other members of  the Amoebozoa. .  while the mtDNA of Dictyostelium and Acanthamoeba have  more similarities with each other than either of them have with the mtDNA of  P. . polycephalum. . Comparison of the Mitochondrial DNA Genomes of Three  Representative Amoebozoans The well-characterized mtDNA of three prototype Amoebozoans—A. 
castel- lani, P. . polycephalum and D. . discoideum—are compared later using a number  of criteria. . Similarities and differences are summarized in Table 4.1. 
116     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology mtDNA size and gene content: All three prototype mtDNAs are double- stranded, circular DNAs between 40 and 65 kbp. . A  castellani is 41,591 bp with  57 genes, while D. . discodeum is 55,564 bp with 59 genes. 
P  polycephalum  mtDNAs range from 60 to 63 kbp and contain at least 45 identified genes and  27 significant (greater than 100 codons), but unassigned, open reading frames  (Fig. . 4 2)  Thirty-five genes are common to all three mtDNAs. . Each mtDNA  has genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport. 
 and  mitochondrial protein synthesis (rRNAs. .  tRNAs   and ribosomal proteins). .  and  unassigned open reading frames (Tables 4.2 and 4.3). . Four tRNA genes. 
 3  FIGURE 4.1 Schematic phylogenetic trees of Unikonts showing possible relationships of the  myxomycetes (Physarum) to other Amoebozoa (Dictyostelium and Acanthamoeba) and Opis- thokonts (animals and fungi). . Amphorea, the common ancestor of the Unikonts, is shown at left  in both panels: (A) tree topology based on nuclear DNA sequences, such as Baldauf et al. . (2000),  and (B) tree topology based on mtDNA features. 
Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    117 rRNA genes. .  14 ribosomal protein genes. .  and 14 genes necessary for oxidative  phosphorylation and electron transport are in common among the 3 mtDNAs. .  Fifty genes are shared in common between A. 
castellani and D. . discoideum,  the unique genes in each mtDNA being primarily tRNA genes and unassigned  ORFs. . Genome organization and gene order: While both A. 
castellani and D. .  discoideum have all genes and ORFs in the same transcriptional orientation,  the genes of P. . polycephalum are transcribed from both strands (52 genes and  ORFs are oriented clockwise, and 20 genes and ORFs are oriented counter- clockwise). 
A  castellani and D. . discoideum also have several blocks of genes  with a common gene order. . The gene sequences rpl16-rpl14-rpl5-rps14-rps8- rpl6-rps13-rps11, rps12-rps7-rpl2-rps19, and nad9-nad7-atp6 are conserved  in both mtDNAs. . The gene sequences rps12-rps7-rpl2-rps19 and rpl14-rpl5- rps14-rps8-rpl6-rps13 are also conserved in P. . polycephalum and are therefore  conserved in all three amoebozoan mtDNAs. 
Both A  castellani and D. . dis- coideum have cox1–cox2 fused in a single open reading. . The presence of this  unusual feature in both organisms indicates that this feature arose in a common  ancestor. . This fusion is absent in P. 
polycephalum. . Another common feature of  A. 
castellani and D. . discoideum that is absent in P. . polycephalum is the pres- ence of group 1 introns in the large subunit ribosomal RNA gene. . A  castellani  has three group 1 introns in the LSU rRNA gene, while D. . discoideum has one  group 1 intron in the LSU rRNA gene and four group 1 introns in the cox1/2  TABLE 4.1 Comparison of Three Prototype Amoebozoan mtDNAs Acanthamoeba  castellani Dictyostelium  discoideum Physarum  polycephalum mtDNA size (bp) 41. . 591 55  564 61  019 Identified protein coding  genes 33 34 37 Unassigned ORFs 5 5 27 tRNA genes 16 18 5 rRNA genes 3 3 3 Fused cox1/2 gene + + − All genes in same  transcriptional  orientation + + − Group 1 introns + + − Inertional RNA editing − − + 5′-Replacement + + + 118     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology fusion gene. . Group I introns have not been detected in the mtDNA of P. . poly- cephalum or other myxomycete mtDNA. . Mitochondrial Gene Expression in the Amoebozoa mtDNA transcription. .  promoters: Mitochondrial DNAs throughout eukaryotes  are primarily transcribed by a highly conserved and dedicated mitochondrial  RNA polymerase (Le et al.. .  2009; Miller et al.. 
 2006)  However, promoter  FIGURE 4.2 Composite map of the mtDNA from several strains of Physarum polycephalum. .  The mtDNA has 72 genes indicated within the circle. 
Genes designated by URF (shown in yel- low) are unassigned reading frames. . Each URF is designated by a letter after the convention of the  mtDNA map of the M3 strain of Physarum. . Classic mitochondrial genes are shown in pink. . Genes  shown as boxes on the outside of the circle are transcribed in a clockwise direction; genes shown  as boxes on the inside of the circle are transcribed in a counterclockwise direction. . The composite  map is 62,862 bp, identical to the Takano et al. . (2001) sequence. 
Four sites of deletion in mtDNA  of other strains of Physarum are shown within the circle. . The sizes in base pairs of the deletions  and their extent relative to URFs are indicated. . The bar beside URF R indicates the location of mF  plasmid homology. . Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    119 TABLE 4.2 Gene Content Comparison of Three Prototype Amoebozoan  mtDNAs Acanthamoeba  castellani Dictyostelium  discoideum Physarum   polycephalum nad1 + + + nad2 + + + nad3 + + + nad4 + + + nad4L + + + nad5 + + + nad6 + + + nad7 + + + nad9 + + + nad11(G) + + + cob + + + cox1 + + + cox2 + + + cox3 + + + atp1 + + + atp6 + + + atp8 − + + atp9 + + + rps2 + + + rps3 + + + rps4 + + + rps7 + + + rps8 + + + rps11 + + + rps12 + + + rps13 + + + rps14 + + + rps16 − − + rps19 + + + rpl2 + + + rpl5 + + + rpl6 + + + rpl11 + + + rpl14 + + + rpl16 + + + rpl19 − − + 120     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology TABLE 4.3 RNA Gene Content Comparison of Three Prototype  Amoebozoan mtDNAs Acanthamoeba  castellani Dictyostelium  discoideum Physarum  polycephalum tRNA-A + + − tRNA-C − + − tRNA-D + − − tRNA-E + + + tRNA-F + + − tRNA-G − − − tRNA-H + + − tRNA-I1 + + − tRNA-I2 + + − tRNA-I3 − + − tRNA-K + + + tRNA-L1 + + − tRNA-L2 + + − tRNA-M1 + + + tRNA-M2 − − + tRNA-N − + − tRNA-P + + + tRNA-Q + + − tRNA-R − + − tRNA-S − − − tRNA-T − − − tRNA-V − − − tRNA-W + + − tRNA-X + − − tRNA-Y + + − LSU rRNA + + + SSU rRNA + + + 5S rRNA + + + Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    121 consensus sequences and transcriptional patterns of mtDNAs vary significant- ly. . The gene arrangement and asymmetric location of the genes on one strand  of the mtDNA of A. 
castellani and D. . discoideum indicate the possibility of  polycistronic transcripts from a single promoter or small number of promot- ers. . Barth et al. . (2001) detected eight major polycistronic transcripts from the  mtDNA of D. . discoideum, which Le et al. 
(2009) showed to be derived from  rapid cotranscriptional processing of a single primary transcript initiated from  a single promoter. . The single transcription initiation site, as detected by 5′ cap- ping analysis, is located upstream of the LSU rRNA gene (Le et al., 2009). . The gene arrangement and distribution of genes on both strands of the mtD- NA of P. . polycephalum implies the need for multiple sites of transcription ini- tiation in Physarum. 
Bundschuh et al. . (2011) characterized the mitochondrial  transcriptome of the plasmodial form of P. . polycephalum. 
They detect the po- tential for at least eight polycistronic transcripts and show that many of the ad- jacent genes are indeed transcribed as a single polycistronic RNA. . Analysis of  the regions upstream of the potential initiation sites has not revealed a possible  promoter consensus sequence. . Interestingly, 25 of the 26 significant unassigned  open reading frames do not appear to be transcribed in the plasmodial (diploid)  form of P. . polycephalum. 
Consistent with this lack of transcription is the observa- tion that the mtDNA of some strains of P. . polycephalum have deletions in these  reading frames without apparent phenotypic effect (Fig. 
4 2)  Further analysis  of the mtDNA of related myxomycetes should reveal whether these ORFs are  transcribed under other developmental or environmental conditions (e.g.. .  in the  amoeboflagellate form of myxomycetes) or are an evolutionary artifact resulting  from the capture of DNA through recombination with a non-mtDNA. .  such as a  mitochondrial plasmid as described by Nakagawa et al. . (1998) and Nomura et al. 
 (2005)  The mF mitochondrial plasmid has been shown to enhance recombination  of mtDNA causing mtDNA gene rearrangement in some strains of Physarum. . RNA self-splicing by Group I introns: A necessary step of gene expression in  mtDNA of A. 
castellani and D. . discoideum is the self-splicing of group I introns  to produce the mature LSU rRNA in both organisms and the cox1/2 transcript  in D. . discoideum. 
The three introns of the LSU rRNA gene of A. . castellani each  have an open reading frame (ORF), as do introns 2 (2 ORFs), 3 and 4 of the  cox1/2 gene in D. . discoideum. 
These ORFs presumably code for maturases or  homing endonucleases necessary for efficient splicing and/or intron mobility. .  These introns probably have the potential for mobility based on the presence of  an open reading frame internal to intron 2 of the cox1/2 gene. .  which codes for a  site-specific DNA homing endonuclease (Ogawa et al.. 
 2000)  RNA editing in mitochondria of the Amoebozoa: Several types of RNA edit- ing are necessary to produce functional, mature rRNAs, tRNAs, and mRNAs in  mitochondria of the Amoebozoa. . One type of RNA editing present in all three  prototype organisms is a 5′-replacement tRNA editing activity, which repairs  tRNAs that overlap other genes or have acceptor end mismatches. 
First charac- terized in mitochondrial tRNAs of A. . castellani (Lonergan and Gray, 1993) 5′  122     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology replacement editing of mitochondrial tRNAs has been inferred in D. . discoideum  based on tRNA gene sequence and demonstration of 5′-tRNA editing activity  in vitro (Abad et al., 2011), and 5′-edited mitochondrial tRNAs have been char- acterized in P. 
palladium (Schindel and Gray, unpublished data) and recently  in P. . polycephalum (Gott et al., 2010). . This 5′-replacement tRNA editing is  based on activity that can add nucleotides to the 5′ end of RNAs in a template- dependent manner (3′–5′ polymerase). . In D  discoideum a His-tRNA guanylyl- transferase (Thg-1)-like protein has been implicated in the 5′ editing of tRNAs  (Abad et al., 2011). 
While 13 out of 16 tRNAs encoded in the A. . castellani ge- nome are edited (Lonergan and Gray, 1993; Price and Gray, 1999), only 2 of the  5 tRNAs encoded by the P. . polycephalum mtDNA are edited by 5′ replacement  editing. 
In each case, a single nucleotide is replaced by a G to create a G–C base  pair at the 1:72 position of the acceptor stem of the tRNA (Gott et al., 2010). . C to U RNA editing has also been identified at a limited number of sites in  mitochondrial RNAs of the Amoebozoa [four sites in P. . polycephalum (Gott  et al., 1993) and one site in the SSU rRNA gene of D. . discoideum mtDNA  (Barth et al., 1999)]. 
Horton and Landweber (2000) have shown that C to U  editing occurs in the cox1 mRNA in other myxomycetes. . The most extensive RNA editing is the insertional RNA editing found ex- clusively in mitochondria of the myxomycetes. . This type of RNA editing is a  signature characteristic of the myxomycetes. . The absence of this type of RNA  editing in the other groups of the amoebozoa is further evidence of the ancient  divergence of the Myxomycetes from the other organisms in the Amoebozoa. .  This type of RNA editing has been demonstrated in all five orders in the myxo- mycetes (Physarales. 
 Stemonitales. .  Echinosteliales. 
 Tricheales. .  and Liceales) and  in more than 60 species of myxomycetes (Antes et al.. 
 1998; Hendrickson and  Silliker. .  2010a  b; Horton and Landweber. 
 2000; Krishnan et al.. .  2007; Traphagen  et al.. 
 2010)  This broad, but exclusive, distribution of insertional RNA editing  makes it a candidate for a defining characteristic of the myxomycetes. . RNAs pro- duced from the mtDNA of P. . polycephalam, have insertions at 1324 sites relative  to the mtDNA sequence producing the RNAs (Bundschuh et al., 2011). . These in- serted nucleotides constitute about 4% of mRNAs and 2% of tRNAs and rRNAs. .  Insertions are primarily single cytidines (1255 sites) or single uridines (43 sites)  or a subset of the possible dinucleotides (AA 4 sites. 
 UU 2 sites. .  UG/GU 4 sites. 
  UC/CU 9 sites. .  UA 2 sites. .  GC/CG 2 sites; 23 sites total). 
At three sites there is a  single purine insertion (a G at two sites and an A at one site). . Of the 47 transcribed  genes and ORFs in the mtDNA of the plasmodial form of P. 
polycephalum, 45 re- quire insertional RNA editing to produce functional tRNAs, rRNAs, and mRNAs  (Bundschuh et al., 2011). . These nucleotide insertions are made cotranscription- ally as the RNA is produced by adding nontemplated nucleotides to the 3′ end of  the nascent RNA (Cheng et al., 2001; Miller and Miller, 2008). . RNA editing sites  are distributed relatively uniformly throughout edited genes. . The distribution of  sites is consistent with the random creation of sites at any location. .  constrained  only by a nine-nucleotide limitation in the proximity of adjacent sites (Krishnan  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    123 et al.. 
 2007; Rhee et al.. .  2009)  The observed pattern has an average spacing of  about 25 nucleotides between editing sites in mRNA, consistent with this model. .  This dynamic model of editing site fixation is consistent with the variation of edit- ing site location in analogous genes of related myxomycetes (Antes et al.. 
 1998;  Hendrickson and Silliker. .  2010a  b; Horton and Landweber. 
 2000; Krishnan  et al.. .  2007; Traphagen et al.. .  2010)  The mechanism and evolution of this unique  type of RNA editing will be discussed in more detail later. 
Evolutionary Implications of mtDNA Structure and Features A strong case can be made for the common ancestry of the organisms in the  Amoebozoa based on their mtDNA similarities. . They have a similar size and  gene content. .  each with between 16 and 18 genes for oxidative phosphoryla- tion and electron transport (14 genes in common). 
 10 and 11 genes coding for  proteins of the small subunit of the mitoribosome (10 genes in common). .  and  6 genes coding for proteins of the large subunit of the mitoribosome (5 genes  in common). .  and 3 rRNA genes for the LSU rRNA. 
 the SSU rRNA. .  and a 5S  rRNA (Bullerwell et al.. .  2010)  The surprising observation in light of phylog- enies based on the nuclear SSU rRNA genes or other nonmitochondrial crite- ria, is the number of similarities between the mtDNA features of A. 
castellani  and D. . discoideum and the number of differences in mtDNA features between  D. . discoideum, the prototype of the dictyostelids and P. 
polycephalum, the pro- totype of the myxomycetes. . To determine whether these differences are due to  a relatively ancient divergence of the dictyostelids and myxomycetes with the  development of some convergent features and morphology. .  or due to a relative- ly rapid evolution in the mtDNA of the myxomycetes. .  will require characteriza- tion of the mtDNAs of additional representatives of the Amoebozoa. 
 especially  the group 1 protostellids and the Cavostellids. .  which are currently thought to be  monophyletic with the dictyostelids and myxomycetes (Shadwick et al.. .  2009)  RELATIONSHIPS WITHIN THE MYXOMYCETES BASED   ON mtDNA STRUCTURE Structure, gene content, and organization of the Physarum mtDNA: The mtD- NA of P. 
polycephalum has a circular restriction map and a genetic complexity  of about 60,000 bp (although the size varies in several strains of Physarum; see  section further on). . The mtDNA of Physarum has been completely sequenced  in several strains (Miller, unpublished data; Takano et al., 2001) and the tran- scriptome has been studied (Bundschuh et al., 2011). 
These studies revealed 72  potential genes that can be grouped in several categories (Table 4.4). . There are  8 genes coding for RNAs: a large and a small subunit rRNA, a 5S rRNA, and 5  tRNAs (Table 4.4). . The remaining 64 genes are potentially protein coding and  can be grouped in 2 general categories. . The classical genes of mtDNAs coding  for protein (37 genes) and potentially protein-coding genes that are not classical  TABLE 4.4 Gene Content of Physarum polycephalum mtDNA Gene Insertional  RNA  editing Transcribed  direction Genomic  location Gene  length Protein  length  for ORFs tRNA-E + +R 48. 
163–48  231 69 tRNA-M1 + +R 48. . 237–48  305 69 tRNA-M2 − +C 53. 
273–53  344 72 tRNA-K + +C 53. . 364–53  435 72 tRNA-P + +C 53. 
454–53  524 71 LSU rRNA + +C 48. . 432–51  149 2  718 SSU rRNA + +C 51. . 353–53  166 1  814 5S rRNA − +C 53. 
178–53  273 96 ERF 1 (php 24) + +C 42. . 721–43  372 652 ORF A − −R 32. . 169–32  882 714 238 ORF B − −R 32. . 885–34  117 1  233 411 ORF C − −R 34. 
396–34  617 222 74 ORF D − −R 44. . 413–44  679 267 89 ORF E − −R 44. . 684–45  295 612 204 ORF F − −R 45. 
432–45  872 441 147 ORF G − −C 45. . 774–46  411 738 246 ORF H − −C 46. 
572–47  168 597 199 ORF I − −R 47. . 693–48  083 390 130 ORF J − −C 61. . 650–196 1  412 471 ORF K − −C 196–1. 
260 1  065 355 ORF L − −C 1. . 269–2  354 1  086 362 ORF M − −C 2. . 354–4  570 1  217 739 ORF N − −C 4. . 557–5  756 1  200 400 ORF O − −C 5. 
771–6  349 579 193 ORF P − −C 6. . 400–7  908 1  509 503 ORF Q − −C 7. . 908–9  074 1  167 389 ORF R − −C 9. . 082–9  744 663 221 ORF S − −C 9. 
740–11  367 1  629 543 ORF T − −C 11. . 517–11  738 222 74 ORF U − −C 11. . 731–12  585 1  128 376 ORF V − −C 13. . 096–13  431 336 112 ORF W − −C 13. 
543–13  935 393 131 ORF X − −C 13. . 938–14  605 669 223 ORF Y − −C 14. . 639–16  810 2  172 724 ORF Z (php 15) − +C 24. 
416–25  471 1  056 352 Gene Insertional  RNA  editing Transcribed  direction Genomic  location Gene  length Protein  length  for ORFs nad1 + +C 58. . 893–59  821 929 nad2 + +C 30. . 699–32  105 1  407 nad3 + +R 38. . 435–38  808 374 nad4 + +R 36. 
933–38  315 1  383 nad4L + +C 35. . 788–36  062 275 nad5 + +C 17. 
259–19  152 1  894 nad6 + +R 56. . 280–56  758 479 nad7 + +R 27. . 535–28  600 1  065 nad9 + +C 41. . 520–41  994 475 nad11(G) + +C 19. 
300–20  316 1  017 cob (cyt b) + +R 59. . 903–61  038 1  136 cox1 + +R 25. . 816–27  534 1  719 cox2 + +R 28. . 983–29  666 864 cox3 + +R 55. 
517–56  278 762 atp1(A) + +C 53. . 845–55  380 536 atp B ? − +C 53. . 565–53  858 293 atp6 + +C 36. 
067–36  774 708 atp8 + +C 35. . 567–35  788 222 atp9 + +C 61. 
225–61  467 243 rps2 + +C 20. . 278–21  633 1  356 rps3 + +R 57. 
431–58  800 1  370 rps4 + +R 43. . 440–44  229 790 rps7 + +C 22. . 246–23  009 764 rps8 + +C 40. . 088–40  509 422 rps11 + +C 41. 
997–42  717 721 rps12 + +C 21. . 746–22  241 496 rps13 + +C 40. . 978–41  517 539 rps14 + +C 39. 
823–40  087 265 rps16 + +C 34. . 704–34  988 284 rps19 + +C 23. . 774–24  139 366 rpl2 + +C 23. . 009–23  777 769 rpl5 + +C 39. 
338–39  822 485 rpl6 + +R 40. . 506–40  972 467 rpl11 + +C 29. . 776–30  652 877 rpl14 + +C 38. . 985–39  338 354 rpl16 + +C 56. . 910–57  434 525 rpl19 + +C 34. 
988–35  540 553 TABLE 4.4 Gene Content of Physarum polycephalum mtDNA (cont.) 126     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology mtDNA genes (27 genes) (Table 4.4). 
Of the 37 classical protein-coding genes,  all but one requires RNA editing to produce the protein. . They produce pro- teins that are part of the 5 complexes of the electron transport chain and ATP  synthesis or they code for protein components of the mitoribosome (11 subunits  of the small subunit designated rps and 7 units of the large subunit designate  rpl). . The mitochondrially encoded subunits of the electron transport chain and  ATP synthase (Table 4.4) are: 10 subunits of the NADH dehydrogenase com- plex (complex I) produced from genes designated nad. 
 1 gene (cob or cyt b)  coding for cytochrome b of the cytochrome bc1 complex (complex III). .  3 genes  designated with cox coding for subunits of cytochrome oxidase (complex IV). .   and 5 genes designated with atp coding for subunits of the ATP Synthase com- plex (complex V). 
The function of the 27 nonclassical genes (Table 4.4) is unclear. . While these  potential protein-coding genes have significant open reading frames (ORFs), 25  of the 27 ORFs are not transcribed (Bundschuh et al., 2011; Jones et al., 1990). .  Of the two that are transcribed (ORF Z and ERF1), only ERF1 requires RNA  editing. 
Both strands of the Physarum mtDNA are transcribed. . Twenty potential  genes (13 classical and 7 nonclassical) are located on one strand, while 52 po- tential genes (34 classical and 18 nonclassical) are located on the other strand. .  The genes are clustered in 15 groups that are potentially transcribed from  the same strand. . These regions could be transcribed from a single promoter  and produce polycistronic transcripts. 
The largest of these groups covers  18,022 bp and is composed of the nonclassical ORFs J-Y. . These very signifi- cant ORFs are separated by only a few nucleotides and some even overlap  with overlapping initiation and termination codons. . Although the potential for  a polycistronic transcript exists, this region does not appear to be transcribed  (Bundschuh et al., 2011; Jones et al., 1990). . Several of the potential polycis- tronic regions display a gene sequence conserved in other members of the  Amoebozoa (rps12-rps7-rpl2-rps19 and rpl14-rpl5-rps14-rps8-rpl6-rps13). 
 Bundschuh et al. . (2011) provide evidence consistent with a polycistronic tran- script including the 23S LSU rRNA, 17S SSU rRNA, 5S rRNA, tRNA Met2,  tRNA Lys, tRNA pro, atp1. . Linear mF Mitochondrial Plasmid In addition to the mtDNA, the mitochondria of some strains of Physarum con- tain an additional genetic element, the linear mF plasmid. . Although mitochon- drial plasmids have been identified and characterized in fungi and plants, the  mF linear plasmid is one of the largest mitochondrial plasmids at 14.5 kb. . It has  terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) at the ends with proteins bound to its 5′ ends,  resembling the replication mechanism of linear DNA viruses. . These TIRs flank  nine significant open reading frames. 
 all potentially transcribed in the same di- rection to potentially produce a single polycistronic transcript encoding nine  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    127 proteins. . Transcription is initiated just inside the end of the left TIR, producing  three major transcripts, corresponding to ORFs 1 and 2, 1–3, and 1–5, respec- tively. . Two minor (low abundance) transcripts are also seen, one corresponding  to ORF 6 and the other to the full-length polycistronic transcript containing all  nine ORFs (Takano et al., 1996). . The amino acid sequences of the proteins do  not match other proteins in GenBank except for the protein produced from ORF  9, which resembles a DNA polymerase (Takano et al., 1994). 
Significantly,  ORF 7 has partial identity to ORF R in mtDNA (Fig. . 4 2)  These identical re- gions provide a site for recombination between the mtDNA and the mF plas- mid. 
Takano et al. . (1992) have shown that this recombination occurs in some  P. . polycephalum strains producing 77 kb linear mtDNAs with mF plasmid TIRs  at the termini. . These mtDNAs presumably replicate using the linear plasmid  mechanism. 
This alternate mechanism of replication may have implications for  plasmodial senescence (Nakagawa et al., 1998), similar to the fungal senes- cence caused by mitochondrial plasmids in Neurospora. . Whether the mF plasmid conveys a selective advantage to strains of Phy- sarum that contain it or is a true molecular parasite (selfish DNA) adapted to  autonomous replication and transmission in mitochondria is not known. . It ap- parently does not have any obligate function, since strains lacking the plasmid  have no apparent growth or respiration defects. . Kawano et al. 
(1991) have  shown that different strains of Physarum have one of two phenotypes. .  mif+  (mitochondrial fusion) and mif− (no mitochondrial fusion) and that the mF  plasmid correlates with the mif+ (mitochondrial fusion) phenotype. . Mitochon- drial fusion allows mtDNA recombination between heteroplasmic zygotes. .  This can alter the transmission of mtDNA alleles from its typical isogametic,  uniparental inheritance. . Variation in the Structure of the mtDNAs   From Different Strains of Physarum The mtDNA of myxomycetes evolves rapidly. 
Different genera have very dif- ferent structures and gene orders, presumably due to inter- and intramolecular  recombination. . Even different strains of Physarum have different mtDNA sizes  with different gene content. . These variations have shed light on the necessity of  the nonclassical, but significant ORFs in Physarum mtDNA. . The observation  that these ORFs do not code for classical mitochondrial proteins and that they  do not seem to be transcribed in plasmodia under the conditions studied. .  argues  that they may be nonfunctional pseudogenes. 
However, the presence of highly  significant open reading frames implies a mechanism of selection to main- tain the open reading frame. . It is possible that these sequences were recently  acquired and have not had time to accumulate mutations that might interrupt  the reading frame. 
To determine if these ORFs are present in other strains of  P. . polycephalum the mtDNA from these strains have been analyzed and par- tially sequenced. . 128     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The mitochondrial DNAs of several strains of P. 
polycephalum have been  mapped and partially sequenced (Miller et al.. .  personal communication) to  identify regions with significant insertions or deletions relative to the mtDNA  sequence of Takano et al. . (2001)  Currently, five regions have been identi- fied with altered mtDNA structure in five different strains (Fig. 
4 2)  Interest- ingly, all of these insertions or deletions fall within nonclassical open reading  frames. . The M3 strain of Physarum has an 1842 bp deletion in ORF M rela- tive to the Takano mtDNA sequence. . This deletion appears to have occurred  through an intragenic recombination of small direct repeat sequences. 
A sec- ond deletion of 919 bp in ORF J is present in some strains derived from the  M3 strain. . A Physarum strain purchased from Carolina Biological Supply  Company contains a 2020 bp deletion of the ORF T. 
 ORF U   ORF V region  and also has altered sequences in the ORF P. .  ORF Q   ORF R region at the site  of the mF mitochondrial plasmid homology. 
Alterations in this same region  were also characterized by Nakagawa et al. . (1998) for strains auxS and auxI. .  These strains also had an insertion in ORF B of 796 bp. . All of the strains  with these deletions were checked to determine if the excised DNA was au- tonomously replicated or transferred to nuclear DNA. . None of the excised  sequences could be detected, indicating that these sequences were lost in these  strains. . Taken together, these observations indicate that the ORFs are optional  sequences in these strains, since these strains showed no associated growth  phenotypes under the conditions grown. . mtDNA Structure in Didymium Iridis All or most of the mtDNA in Didymium iridis has been sequenced by the Sil- liker laboratory (Kopp, 2012). 
The sequence complexity is at least 69,050 bp,  7 kb larger than the Takano et al. . (2001) mtDNA sequence for Physarum. . The  classical mitochondrial gene content is nearly identical to Physarum mtDNA  (Hendrickson and Silliker, 2010a,b; Silliker, personal communication; Trapha- gen et al., 2010; Fig. 
4 2)  While several contigs have been produced; assembly  of these contigs into a single circular genome has been problematic. . It is likely  that intragenic recombination has created autonomously replicating subgenomic  circular mtDNAs, since some of the contigs appear to be circular (Kopp, 2012). .  This may indicate that origins of replication are positioned at multiple locations  allowing recombinant circles to autonomously replicate. . Gene order on the Didymium mtDNA contigs seems to be generally different  than on the mtDNA of Physarum with a few notable exceptions. 
 that is   rps12/ rps7/rpl2/rps19; atp8/nad4l/atp6; cox3/nad6; and rpl16/rps3. .  which are con- served as potential polycistronic transcript regions in both mtDNAs. . The cat- egories of genes in Didymium also seem similar to those in Physarum. 
There are  unassigned ORFs. .  which do not correspond to classical mitochondrial genes. .   and the full complement of classical mitochondrial genes. .  all of which (except  nad 3) require RNA editing for their expression. 
Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    129 Mitochondrial Bar Coding and mtDNA Phylogenies of  Myxomycetes Analysis of variation in mtDNA sequences has been useful in generating phy- logenies. . Because mtDNA is a moderately repetitive DNA relative to single- copy genes in the chromosomes. .  it is easy to isolate and is particularly good for  ancient DNA analysis since some of the multiple copies of the mtDNA are able  to persist intact relative to single-copy genes. . mtDNA-generated phylogenies  and phylogenies generated from nuclear sources. 
 such as SSU rRNA sequenc- es. .  are generally similar in topology and branch length. .  indicating that these  DNAs acquire change in essentially the same way and act as separate molecular  clocks. .  albeit clocks often running at different rates. 
Krishnan et al. . (2007) developed a bar-coding technique useful for field  work, based on the polymerase chain reaction, which can specifically amplify  a region of the mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal DNA. . This region con- tains flanking sequences that are universally conserved among myxomycetes  and many other organisms, such as fungi, making them ideal for PCR primers. .  The primers used to amplify the mitochondrial DNA SSU rRNA were chosen so  as to specifically amplify the mitochondrial core SSU rRNA in preference to the  nuclear SSU rRNA. . Internal to these highly conserved flanking sequences are  sequences that are less highly conserved. 
 moderately conserved. .  and relatively  variable. 
 and so these sequences can be used to compare both closely related  and distantly related species. . The amplification products produced from these  primers correspond to coordinates 676–1127 (452 nucleotides) of the mitochon- drial SSU rRNA of P. . polycephalum (Mahendran et al., 1994). 
Amplification  products from myxomycetes generally vary from about 435 to 520 nucleotides  depending on the size of the variable region within the amplification product. .  These sequences contain characterized RNA editing sites and so can be used to  both study the evolution of RNA editing (see section further on) and to generate  phylogenies. . Miller et al. 
(personal communication) has used these bar-coding amplifica- tion products to generate a phylogeny of 70 different myxomycetes correspond- ing to the six myxomycete orders (Physarales. .  Stemonitales. .  Echinosteliales. .   Trichiales. 
 Liceales   and Ceratiomyxales) and outgroup organisms (Fig. . 4 3)   This tree generally recapitulates phylogenies produced using nuclear sequences  from myxomycetes (Fiore-Dunno et al., 2005). . It is reassuring to see that these  phylogenies generally match the phylogenetic trees generated using myxomy- cete morphological characters, although some variations exist. 
In general, the  genera within each of the six orders group together. . The tree is rooted through  sequences from Acanthamoeba, Dictyostelium, Protostelium, and E. . coli  The  Ceratiomyxales form a single clade separate from the sister clade that contains  the other myxomycetes. . This sister clade is formed by two separate clades. 
 one  containing the organisms of the orders Liceales and Trichiales. .  the other clade  contains the organisms of the orders Physarales. 
 Stemonitales. .  Echinosteliales. .  130     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology FIGURE 4.3 Phylogenetic tree of the myxomycetes based on comparisons of core sequences  of the small subunit rRNA gene on mtDNA from 61 species of myxomycetes and 7 outgroup  species. . Species within the six orders of myxomycetes are abbreviated to the right. . Pc13   Pc110    Pc36: Physarum compressum; Phydi: Physarum didermoides; Pn126: Physarum necaraguense; Pp:  Physarum polycephalum; Pp25: Physarum pusillum; Lf04: Leocarpus fragilis; Fs06. .  FsNC2   Fs65    Fs323   FsR1: Fuligo septica; Pm43. 
 Pm43   Pm94: Physarum mellum; Dc93: Dianema corticatum;  Db77: Didymium bahiense; Dn: Didymium nigripes; Di: Didymium iridis; Ds: Didymium squamu- losum; Lt90: Lepidoderma tigrinum; Dr79: Diderma radiatum; Dl101. .  Dl118   Dl18: Diachea leu- copodia; Ls124: Lamproderma sauteri; Co29: Colloderma; Ep78: Enerthenema papillatum; Stem:  Stemonitis flavogenita; Cv40: Cribraria violacea; Echino. .  Em01: Echinostelium minutum; Cd70:  Clastoderma debaryanum; Lycog. 
 LeNC1   Le10: Lycogala epidendrum; Lf01: Lycogala flavofus- cum; Dc269: Dictydium cancellatum; Pc85: Perichanena corticalis; Tv122: Trichia varia; Ac57:  Arcyria cinerea; Ad58: Arcyria denudata; Tf62. .  Tf11   Tf05: Tubifera ferruginosa; CfA. .  Cf133    CfB   Cf132   Cf433   Cf131   CfD: Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa; Acan: Acanthamoeba; Dicty: Dictyoste- lium discoideum; Proto: Protostelium; Oeno: Oenothera (plant); Ec: Escherichia coli. . Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    131 The Liceales/Trichiales clade is not well resolved into the separate orders. .  the  Trichiales and Liceales. 
 which do not form separate clades. . Within the Liceales/ Trichiales (LT) clade. .  Arcyria   Trichia   and Perichaena form a single clade. .  and  species of Lycogala and Tubifera group together but do not form a single clade  that would separate the members of the Liceales from the Trichiales. 
Within the Physarales/Stemonitales/Echinosteliales (PSE) clade the organ- isms of the Echinosteleales (Echinosteliaceae and Clastodermaceae) do not re- solve into a single clade but do branch closely together. . The organisms of the  order Stemonitales group as a single clade with two branches. .  one branch with  the two genera Stemonitis and Enerthenema as a clade and the other branch with  Lamproderma. .  Colloderma and Diachea. 
The members of the Physarales are  paraphyletic within the PSE clade and do not form a single sister clade with the  members of the Stemonitales. . Within the PSE clade, members of the Physarales  cluster together in separate smaller clades which separately group five species  of Physarum [P. 
polycephalum, P. . didermoides, P. . compressum, P. . pusillum,  and P. . nutans (=P. 
album)] and Leocarpus, four species of Didymium species  (D. . iridis, D  nigripes, D. . bahiense, and D. . squamulosum), along with Fuligo  septica and Physarum melleum. . Nandipati et al. 
(2012) have also reported a  polyphyletic origin of the genus Physarum (Physarales), based on data from  nuclear rDNA minichromsome analysis and group I intron comparisons. . INSERTIONAL RNA EDITING IN THE MYXOMYCETES Insertional RNA editing in the myxomycetes is a novel form of RNA edit- ing discovered and characterized in P. . polycephalum (Mahendran et al., 1991;  Miller et al., 1993a,b,c) and present in the mitochondria of every myxomycete  studied to date (Krishnan et al., 2007). . This unique type of RNA editing has not  been observed in any organism outside the myxomycetes and thus is a molecu- lar candidate for a defining characteristic of the myxomycetes. . This type of RNA editing is characterized by the specific insertion of a nu- cleotide or nucleotides in nascent mitochondrial RNAs relative to the mitochon- drial DNA template to create open reading frames in mRNAs and classical sec- ondary and tertiary structures in tRNAs and rRNAs. . Two examples of deletional  RNA editing have been observed in the myxomycetes (Gott et al.. .  2005; Krish- nan et al.. 
 2007)   but it is not clear if the mechanism of these deletions is simi- lar to insertional RNA editing or if this constitutes an additional type of RNA  editing in myxomycetes. . Although insertional RNA editing has been identified  in mitochondria of other organisms (notably. 
 the trypanosomes). .  this insertional  editing in these organisms is posttranscriptional and is based on a gRNA tem- plate and editosomes which insert (and delete) uridines in primary transcripts  produced from cryptogenes on maxicircle mtDNA (Stuart et al.. .  2005)  This  posttranscriptional mechanism is in contrast to the cotranscriptional mecha- nism used in myxomycete RNA editing. . It is this cotranscriptional mechanism  that makes the RNA editing in the myxomycetes unique. . This cotranscriptional  132     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology editing is based on the mitochondrial RNA polymerase which can add nontem- plated nucleotides to the 3′ end of RNAs (Miller and Miller. .  2008)  The current  model predicts that Physarum mitochondrial RNA polymerase is able to pause  in transcription at precise sites. .  add nontemplated nucleotides to the 3′ end of  nascent RNA. .  and then resume templated transcription (Cheng et al.. 
 2001;  Miller and Miller. .  2008)  The inserted nucleotide is usually a single cytidine,  but at some sites the nucleotide can be a uridine, and at rare sites adenosine or  guanosine nucleotides are inserted (Bundschuh et al., 2011). . Less frequently  a dinucleotide can be inserted relative to the mtDNA template. . The sequence  of the dinucleotide is a subset of the possible dinucleotide sequences. . Most  common are AA, CU (or UC), and GU (or UG), but GC (or CG), UU, and UA  have been observed, 6 of the possible 10 dinucleotide combinations (Bundschuh  et al., 2011). . Bundschuh et al. . (2011) have used deep transcriptome analysis to identify  the complete complement of insertional RNA editing sites in mitochondria of P. 
 polycephalum. . They detected 1324 sites, 1301 single nucleotide insertions, and  23 dinucleotide insertions. . Of the single insertion sites, 1255 are cytidine, 43 are  uridine, 2 are guanosine, and 1 is adenosine. 
This shows that any nucleotide can  be specified at a site but that pyrimidines and particularly cytidines are favored. .  All four nucleotides can also be inserted in the form of dinucleotides. .  although  not all possible dinucleotide combinations are observed and there is a bias in the  frequencies with which the dinucleotides are observed. . The most common di- nucleotide is CU (or UC), inserted at nine sites with AA and UG (or GU), each  inserted at four sites, and UU, UA, and GC (or CG), each inserted at two sites. 
These 1314 RNA editing sites are distributed among 43 genes on the Phy- sarum mtDNA (10 sites are extragenic; Bundschuh et al., 2011). . All of these  genes, except one (ERF I), have been identified as classical mitochondrial  genes and include 37 protein-coding genes, 2 rRNA genes, and 4 tRNA genes  (Table 4.4). 
This means that there are multiple RNA editing sites in each gene. .  In mRNAs the editing sites are distributed rather evenly throughout the reading  frame and there is on average about 25 nucleotides between editing sites. .  so that  about 4% of mRNAs are nontemplated nucleotides. . In ribosomal rRNAs and  tRNAs, the spacing distribution also averages about 25 nucleotides, but only in  some regions. 
The overall editing site density in rRNAs is about 1 for every 50  nucleotides, resulting in about 2% of rRNAs being nontemplated nucleotides. . RNA editing consists of the RNA polymerase adding specific nontemplat- ed nucleotides to the 3′ end of nascent RNA transcripts. 
Mitochondrial RNA  polymerases are highly conserved among all eukaryotic organisms and are a  member of a super family of single subunit polymerases including bacterio- phage RNA polymerases. .  DNA-directed DNA polymerases. .  and RNA-directed  RNA polymerases (reverse transcriptases) (Cermakian et al.. 
 1977; Lazcano  et al.. .  1988; Miller et al.. 
 2006)  Many of these polymerases have been shown  to add nontemplated nucleotides to the 3′ end of nucleic acids but only the Phy- sarum mitochondrial polymerase has been shown to add a specific non-DNA  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    133 templated nucleotide at a specific location during transcription resulting in non- DNA templated internal insertions (RNA editing). . How this specificity of loca- tion and nucleotide identity is achieved and how transcription can be resumed  after a nontemplated insertion are major questions of the mechanism of RNA  editing in myxomycetes that remain to be answered. . Specificity of RNA Editing Site Location Editing sites in mRNAs must have the specific nucleotide added. .  at precisely  the correct site. .  with 100% efficiency to produce mRNAs that will specify the  correct amino acid. 
 without reading frame shifts. . How the RNA polymerase is  caused to pause precisely at the proper editing site and insert the specific non- templated nucleotide is not yet understood. . Early attempts to identify editing  site consensus sequences were not fruitful. .  although a dinucleotide bias was  observed upstream of RNA editing sites [i.e.. .  many   but not all. 
 editing sites are  preceded by a purine-pyrimidine dinucleotide (especially a purine. .  U dinucleo- tide) but this sequence is present at many sites that are not editing sites]. 
The  role, if any, of this bias is not known, but it is clearly not sufficient to explain  RNA editing site specificity. . It is unlikely that any consensus sequence will be  identified since editing site location can change in different myxomycetes even  within regions highly conserved in sequence (see Section “Evolution of RNA  Editing. 
 Variation in Editing Site Location”). . Another possible method of specifying editing site location would be the  marking of editing sites through chemical modifications of the mtDNA at edit- ing sites. . No evidence of such modifications which correlate with RNA editing  sites has been reported. . An alternate method of marking RNA editing sites would be the use of an  antisense sequence complementary to the mRNA sequence at the editing site. .  This RNA would have the additional advantage of being able to specify the  identity of the inserted nucleotide through base pairing. . The insertional RNA  editing in mitochondria of trypanosomes provides a precedent for such a mech- anism. . Here small guide RNAs (gRNAs) antisense to the mRNA mark editing  sites and template uridine insertion and deletion (Stuart et al., 2005). 
These  gRNAs are produced from templates on maxicircle (mtDNA) and specialized  minicircle DNAs within trypanosome mitochondria. . Sensitive searches for such  antisense RNAs or DNA sequences on mtDNA that could code for gRNAs in  Physarum have not revealed any candidates for a gRNA-like mechanism. . Tran- scriptome analysis using deep sequencing has also not detected any candidate  gRNAs (Bundschuh et al., 2011). 
The complexity and specificity of RNA editing in Physarum and the main- tenance of editing site location during replication of mtDNA argues that the  genetic information for functional mitochondrial proteins. .  rRNAs   and tRNAs  must be maintained. . This information is not present in the mtDNA and no anti- sense template able to transfer the genetic information for editing site location  134     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology and nucleotide specificity through base pairing has been detected. 
Only fully  edited. .  mature RNAs have this genetic information and it is not clear how this  information could be transmitted and maintained without an antisense RNA  sequence. .  since this type of genetic information is classically transmitted in  replication and transcription through base pairing interactions with the template  strand of DNA. 
One way in which editing sites on the mtDNA could be marked  is through base pairing interactions between the template strand of the mtDNA  and the fully edited, mature RNA. . The extra nucleotides in the RNA resulting  from nontemplated nucleotide insertions during transcription would not base  pair with mtDNA and could be flipped out of the duplex, marking editing sites. .  These extra bases in the mRNA-mtDNA duplex could cause the mitochondrial  RNA polymerase to pause and initiate nontemplated nucleotide addition. 
This  model would require the nascent RNA to remain associated with the template  strand of the DNA after synthesis, forming a type of DNA/RNA/DNA triplex. .  This triplex could consist of a DNA/RNA duplex associated through Watson- Crick base pairing with the displaced DNA strand plectonemically associated  with the duplex in the major groove and stabilized by Hoogsteen base pairing of  pyrimidines with the template strand. 
While this model can explain how editing  sites are identified and maintained, it does not explain how the identity of the  inserted nucleotide is determined. . Specificity of Inserted Nucleotide Identity Although there is variability in the nontemplated nucleotide that can be inserted  at RNA editing sites. .  the type of nucleotide inserted at a particular site is con- stant. . How this nucleotide specificity is achieved is not known. 
Since 1255 of  the 1324 (95%) of the insertional RNA editing sites in Physarum are single  cytidines. .  it is tempting to propose that once the RNA polymerase is paused in  transcription at a potential editing site. .  a cytidine-specific terminal transferase  activity adds a single cytidine to the 3′ end of the nascent transcript and then  DNA-templated RNA synthesis continues by adding a templated nucleotide to  the 3′ end of the RNA. 
However, this then begs the question of how the remain- ing 5% of the insertions are specified as different nucleotides or dinucleotides. .  Whether these noncytidine insertions are exceptions to the rule and must be  specified in some way or whether the identity of all inserted nucleotides are  specified in the same way. 
 the need for some type of template is clear. . The na- ture of this template is not clear. 
Preliminary evidence (Miller et al.. .  personal  communication) from another member of the polymerase super family of which  mitochondrial RNA polymerases are a part (T7 RNA polymerase) may provide  some clues to the way that this specificity is achieved. . T7 RNAP is known to  add a random nontemplated nucleotide to the 3′ end of RNAs (or DNAs) in the  presence of complex DNA or RNA sequences. . This addition can be controlled  in vitro by the addition of simple, defined nucleic acid sequences to the T7 RNA  polymerase. 
In this in vitro system the identity of the templated nucleotides can  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    135 be specified by creating the potential for intramolecular (or intermolecular) base  pairing interactions that create recessed 3′ ends that can be extended by one  or a few nucleotides on the template provided by the extended 5′ end (limited  primer extension). . Indeed, the addition of a nucleotide to the 3′ end is dependent  on this potential. 
This activity can occur in the absence of transcription when  only a single rNTP is provided. . Whether this type of intra- or intermolecular  templating can occur in RNA during RNA editing to specify nucleotide identity  is under study. . Evolution of RNA Editing. 
 Variation in Editing Site Location Dependable phylogenies based on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequences  have allowed analysis of the evolution of RNA editing patterns in different strains  of myxomycetes and has provided insight into the constraints on RNA editing  site location in mitochondria of these organisms. . Studies comparing RNA edit- ing patterns in different genera of myxomycetes with the RNA editing pattern  in Physarum (Antes et al.. 
 1998; Hendrickson and Silliker. .  2010a  b; Horton and  Landweber. 
 2000; Krishnan et al.. .  2007; Traphagen et al.. 
 2010) have revealed  that the same type of insertional RNA editing is present in all of the myxomy- cetes examined. .  but that the location of the editing sites varied within the analo- gous. 
 and often very conserved sequence. .  was studied. 
This variation indicates  an unanticipated dynamic in the location of RNA editing sites over evolutionary  time periods and provides insights to the constraints on editing site location. .  as  well as the mechanism of editing site establishment and removal. . Krishnan et al. 
(2007) compared editing site location among six myxomy- cetes by comparison of cDNA and mtDNA sequences in the core region of the  mitochondrial SSU rRNA (Fig. . 4 4)  This core region included 452 nucleotides  and 10 characterized editing sites in Physarum [eight sites with single cytidine  insertions and two sites with dinucleotides (AA and CU) insertions]. . Alignment  of the mtDNA and cDNA sequences from these six myxomycetes revealed a  total of 29 different editing sites within this region. 
 although the number of  editing sites in this region in any one organism varied from 8 to 10. . While some  of these 29 potential RNA editing sites were located closer to each other than 9  nucleotides. .  the distance between actual editing sites was greater than 9 nucleo- tides in each individual organism. . In this conserved region. 
 all potential editing  sites that did not have a nontemplated insertion. .  had a templated nucleotide at  that position so the cDNA sequences of these organisms aligned without gaps. .   and gaps in the mtDNA sequence alignments were strongly predictive of RNA  editing sites. . In most, but not all of the sites, the nontemplated nucleotide was  identical to the templated nucleotide. . All of these editing sites had similar con- straints to RNA editing sites in Physarum. 
 that is   (1) they were never located  closer to each other than 9 nucleotides. .  (2) they were predominately single cy- tidine insertions with occasional single uridine and dinucleotide insertions. .  and  (3) many had purine-pyrimidine nucleotides immediately upstream of the site. . 136     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Despite these similarities, the locations of editing sites in these organisms  varies dramatically. 
Although P. . polycephalum and Lycogala epidendrum have  almost the same number of editing sites in this region (10 and 9, respectively),  they do not have any editing sites in common. . In general, more closely related or- ganisms have a greater number of common sites in this region. 
These differences  FIGURE 4.4 RNA editing sites—cDNA/mtDNA alignment pairs for six myxomycetes. . Pp,  Dn, Pd, Sf, Le, and Em indicate Physarum polycephalum, Didymium nigripes, Physarum dider- moides, Stemonitis flavogenetia, Lycogola epidendrum, and Echinostelium minutum, respectively. 
 Gaps in the cDNA/mtDNA indicate RNA editing sites. . RNA editing sites present in some strains  are indicated with C or CU beneath the six alignment pairs. . A variable region in which alignment  was difficult has been omitted. 
Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    137 in editing site location implies that editing sites may be created and/or elimi- nated over time resulting in the divergence of editing patterns. . To determine the  sequence in which these changes occur, the pattern of editing sites in these six  organisms was superimposed on the topology of the mitochondrial phylogenetic  tree. 
Several different patterns of editing site change consistent with the tree  topology are equally parsimonious. .  but all of them predict both the creation and  deletion of sites to produce the editing pattern in the contemporary organism. 
How insertional editing sites are gained or lost in myxomycetes is not  known. . The fact that most of the inserted non-DNA templated nucleotides in  RNAs correspond to templated nucleotides already present at the analogous site  in other organisms that are not edited at that site. .  implies that a mechanism must  preexist to add nucleotides to RNAs to compensate for deletions in the mtDNA. .  Conversely, this preexisting activity must not function if the deletion is elimi- nated through some mechanism. . Krishnan et al. 
(2007) have proposed a model  of the evolution of RNA editing in the myxomycetes based on the general model  of RNA editing proposed by Gray et al. . (Covello and Gray, 1993; Gray, 2001;  Price and Gray, 1998), which explains the linkage between these two processes  and the observed variation in editing site patterns among myxomycetes. . Analy- sis of editing site location in the same sequence of different myxomycetes shows  that the editing can be essentially at any location. 
Krishnan et al. . (2007) propose  that editing sites accumulate through corrections in the RNA of random dele- tions in the DNA template and that the location of these corrected deletions is  only constrained by three criteria. . These are (1) the purine-pyrimidine bias, (2)  the cytidine preference, and (3) the proximity constraint of at least nine nucleo- tides between editing sites. . The first two criteria are not particularly limiting, but  the proximity constraint limits the density of editing sites and could ultimately  slow or stop editing site accumulation in an organism. . This constraint would  not allow editing sites to be created between existing editing sites separated by  9–17 nucleotides. .  and sites separated by 18–26 nucleotides would have small  target sites (1–10 nucleotides) for an additional editing site to be created. 
The  probability of random deletions occurring within these permissible zones would  become smaller with each addition until the rate of accumulation approached  zero. . This saturation density would be expected at an average spacing of about  22 nucleotides, very close to the observed density of RNA editing sites (about  25 nucleotides) in Physarum. . The fact that many of the myxomycetes studied  have this density may indicate that most of them are at or near saturation. 
There  is also evidence that editing patterns could be altered through the deletion of ed- iting sites. . Landweber (1992) and Simpson et al. 
(Maslov et al., 1994; Simpson  and Maslov, 1994) have proposed retrotransposition as a mechanism of elimi- nating editing sites in Trypanosomes. . Integration of cDNAs produced from re- verse transcription of edited RNAs would remove the deletions and restore the  genetic information to the mtDNA. . This process would tend to eliminate the  editing site saturation and allow rapid fixation of new editing sites at random  locations creating new patterns of editing these organisms. 
138     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology An additional constraint on the location of RNA editing sites seems to be the  functional importance of the nucleotide added in RNA editing. . This constraint  affects the distribution of RNA editing sites in rRNAs. 
Highly conserved and  presumably functionally important sequences accumulate editing sites at near  saturation density. .  while editing sites in poorly conserved sequences generally  can be absent or present at a low density. 
This implies that editing site fixation  is affected by natural selection as might be expected if editing restores the func- tion of a critical RNA. . Consistent with this idea is the observation that editing  sites are fixed at virtually all locations in mRNAs. .  since any deletions within  this region will cause a frameshift that would generally prevent the production  of a functional protein. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND AREAS OF FUTURE RESEARCH This chapter has summarized the recent advances in the genomics and gene  expression of myxomycetes with special emphasis on the novel mechanism of  gene expression in mitochondria of the myxomycetes (RNA editing). . To date,  with a few exceptions, most of the information about the molecular genetics of  myxomycetes has come from research on the prototype organism of the myxo- mycetes, P. 
polycephalum. . The recent completion of the genomic sequence of  Physarum has helped to define the relationship of the myxomycetes to other  members of the Amoebozoa and the place of myxomycetes in the evolution of  eukaryotic organisms. . This first genomic sequence in the myxomycetes should  spur further genomic research in the myxomycetes, provide a reference for ge- nomic comparisons, and aid in myxomycete genome assemblies. . The mitochondrial DNA of myxomycetes also promises to be a fertile area  of research. 
The Physarum mtDNA has the potential to express one of the larg- est number of genes of any mtDNA. . Many of these potential genes are novel  among all mtDNAs and their function, if any, is unknown. . Some do not appear  to be transcribed under the conditions studied. 
Whether these novel genes are  preserved in the mtDNA of other myxomycetes is still to be determined. . If they  are preserved, the function of these apparently myxomycete-specific genes will  be of particular interest. 
Also, many of the classic features of mtDNAs, such as  promoters, origins of replication, and so forth have not yet been characterized in  Physarum. . Comparison of the mtDNA sequences from additional myxomyce- tes should help to identify these features and to provide additional information  about evolution within the myxomycetes and the relationship of the myxomy- cetes to other organisms within the Amoebozoa. . Finally   studies to elucidate the mechanism and evolution of the novel type  of RNA editing present in mitochondria of myxomycetes are crucial to our un- derstanding of the evolution and uniqueness of these organisms. .  as well as to  the evolution of gene expression. .  in general. 
These studies should also provide  insights into the origin of mitochondria and could be relevant to the mechanism  of gene expression in mitochondria of all eukaryotes, including humans. . Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    139 REFERENCES Abad, M.G., Long, Y., Willcox, A., Gott, J.M., Gray, M.W., Jackman, J.E., 2011. 
A role for tRNA  His guanylyltransferase (Thg1)-like proteins from Dictyostelium discoideum in mitochondrial  5′-tRNA editing. . RNA 17, 613–623. .  Adler, P.N., Holt, C.E., 1974. 
Genetic analysis in the Colonia strain of Physarum polycephalum:  heterothallic strains that mate with and are partially isogenic to the Colonia strain. . Genetics  78, 1051–1062. .  Antes, T., Costandy, H., Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M., Miller, D., 1998. 
Insertional editing of  tRNAs of Physarum polycephalum and Didymium nigripes. . Mol  Cell  Biol  18, 7521–7527. .  Aguilera, P., Barry, T., Tovar, J., 2008. 
Entamoeba histolytica mitosomes: organelles in search of a  function. . Exp  Parasitol  118, 10–16. .  Arisue, N., Hashimoto, T., Lee, J.A., Moore, D.V., Gordon, P., Sensen, C.W., Gaasterland, T.,  Hasegawa, M., Muller, M., 2002. 
The phylogenetic position of the pelobiont Mastigamoeba  balamuthi based on sequences of rDNA and translation elongation factors EF-1 alpha and EF-2. .  J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  49, 1–10   Baldauf, S.L., Roger, A.J., Wenk-Siefert, I., Doolittle, W.F., 2000. . A kingdom level phylogeny of  eukaryotes based on combined protein data. 
Science 290, 972–977. .  Bapteste, E., Brinkmann, H., Lee, J., Moore, D., Sensen, C., Gordon, P., Durufle, L., Gaasterland,  T., Lopez, P., Muller, M., Phillippe, H., 2002. 
The analysis of 100 genes support the grouping  of three highly divergent amoebae: Dictyostelium, Entamoeba, and Mastigamoeba. . Proc  Natl   Acad  Sci  USA 99, 1414–1419. .  Barth, C., Greferath, U., Kotsifas, M., Fisher, P.R., 1999. 
Polycistronic transcription and editing  of the mitochondrial small subunit (SSU) ribosomal RNA in Dictyostelium discoideum. . Curr   Genet  36, 55–61   Barth, C., Greferath, U., Kotsifas, M., Tanaka, Y., Alexander, S., Alexander, H., Fisher, P.R., 2001. .  Transcript mapping and processing of mitochondrial RNA in Dictyostelium discoideum. 
Curr   Genet  39, 355–364. .  Bohnert, H.J., 1977. 
Size and structure of the mitochondrial DNA of the slime mold, Physarum  polycephalum. . Exp  Cell Res  106, 426–430. .  Bohnert, H.J., Schiller, B., Bohme, R., Sauer, H.W., 1975. 
Circular DNA and rolling circles in  nuclear r-DNA from mitotic nuclei of Physarum polycephalum. . Eur  J  Biochem  57, 361–369. .  Bolivar, I., Fahrni, J.F., Smirnov, A., Pawlowski, J., 2001. 
SSU rRNA-based phylogenetic position  of the genera amoeba and chaos (Lobosea, Gymnamoebia): the origin of gymnamoebae revis- ited. . Mol  Biol  Evol  18, 2306–2314. .  Braun, R., Evans, T.E., 1969. 
Replication of nuclear satellite and mitochondrial DNA in the mitotic  cycle of Physarum. . Biochim  Biophys  Acta 182, 511–522. .  Bullerwell, C.E., Burger, G., Gott, J.M., Kourennaia, O., Schnare, M.N., Gray, M.W., 2010. 
Abun- dant 5S rRNA-like transcripts encoded by the mitochondrial genome in amoebozoa. . Eukaryot   Cell 9, 762–773. .  Bundschuh, R., Antmuller, J., Becker, C., Nurnburg, P., Gott, J.M., 2011. 
Complete characteriza- tion of the edited transcriptome of the mitochondrion of Physarum polycephalum using deep  sequencing of RNA. . Nucleic Acids Res. . 39, 6044–6055. .  Burger, G., Plante, I., Lonergan, K.M., Gray, M.W., 1995. 
The mitochondrial DNA of the amoebid  protozoa, Acanthamoeba castellani: complete sequence, gene content and genome organiza- tion. . J  Mol  Biol  245, 522–537. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 1998. 
A revised six-kingdom system of life. . Biol  Rev  Camb  Philos  Soc  73,  203–266. 
 140     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Cavalier-Smith, T., Fiore-Dunno, A.M., Chao, E., Kudryavtsev, A., Berney, C., Snell, E.A., Lewis,  R., 2015. . Multigene phylogeny resolves deep branching of Amoebozoa. 
Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol   83, 293–304. .  Cermakian, N., Ikeda, T.M., Miramontes, P., Lang, B.F., Gray, M.W., 1977. 
On the evolution of the  single-subunit RNA polymerases. . J  Mol  Evol  45, 671–681. .  Cheng, Y.W., Visomirski-Robic, L.M., Gott, J.M., 2001. 
Non-templated addition of nucleotides to  the 3′ end of nascent RNA during RNA editing in Physarum. . EMBO J  20, 1405–1414. .  Covello, P.S., Gray, M.W., 1993. . On the evolution of RNA editing. . Trends Genet. 
9, 265–268. .  Crick, F.H.C., 1966. 
Codon–anticodon pairing: the wobble hypothesis. . J  Mol  Biol  19, 548–555. .  Evans, T.E., 1966. 
Synthesis of a cytoplasmic DNA during the G2 interphase of Physarum poly- cephalum. . Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun  22, 678–683. .  Evans, T.E., Suskind, D., 1971. 
Characterization of mitochondrial DNA of the slime mold, Physa- rum polycephalum. . Biochim  Biophys  Acta 228, 350–364. .  Fahrni, J.F., Bolivar, I., Berney, C., Nassonova, E., Smirnov, A., Pawlowski, J., 2003. 
Phylogeny  of lobose amoebae based on action and small-subunit ribosomal RNA genes. . Mol  Biol  Evol   18, 418–426. .  Ferris, P.J., 1985. 
Nucleotide sequence of the central non-transcribed spacer region of Physarum  polycephalum rDNA. . Gene 39, 203–211. .  Ferris, P.J., Vogt, V.M., 1982. 
Structure of the central spacer region of extrachromosomal ribosomal  DNA in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Mol  Biol  159, 359–381. .  Fiore-Dunno, A., Berney, C., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. 
High-order phylogeny of plasmo- dial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA gene  sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 201–210. .  Forget, L., Ustinova, J., Wang, Z., Huss, V.A.R., Lang, B.F., 2002. 
Hyaloraphidium curvatum: a  linear mitochondrial genome, tRNA editing, and an evolutionary link to lower fungi. . Mol  Biol   Evol  19, 310–319. .  Forney, J., Henderson, E.R., Blackburn, E.H., 1987. 
Identification of the telomeric sequence of the  acellular slime molds Didymium iridis and Physarum polycephalum. . Nucleic Acids Res. 
15,  9143–9152. .  Gill, E.E., Diaz-Trivino, S., Barbara, M.J., Silberman, J.D., Stechmann, A., Gaston, D., Tamas,  I., Roger, A.J., 2007. . Novel mitochondria-related organelles in the anaerobic amoeba Mastig- amoeba balamuthi. . Mol  Microbiol  66, 1306–1320. .  Glockner, G., Golderer, G., Werner-Felmayer, G., Meyer, S., Marwan, W., 2008. 
A first glimpse at  the transcriptome of Physarum polycephlum. . BMC Genomics 9, 6–16. .  Gott, J.M., Parimi, N., Bundschuh, R., 2005. 
Discovery of new genes and deletion editing in Phy- sarum mitochondria enabled by a novel algorithm for finding edited RNAs. . Nucleic Acids Res. 
 33, 5063–5072. .  Gott, J.M., Somerlot, B.H., Gray, M.W., 2010. 
Two forms of RNA editing are required for tRNA  maturation in Physarum mitochondria. . RNA 16, 482–488. .  Gott, J.M., Visomirski, L.M., Hunter, J.L., 1993. 
Substitutional and insertional RNA editing of  the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I mRNA of Physarum polycephalum. . J  Biol  Chem  268,  25483–25486. .  Gray, M.W., 2001. . Speculations of the origin and evolution of editing. . In: Bass, B.L. 
(Ed.), RNA  Editing. . Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. . 160–184   Gray, M.W., Lang, B.F., Burger, G., 2004. 
Mitochondria of protists. . Annu  Rev  Genetet  38,  477–524. .  Gubler, U., Tyler, T., Braun, R., 1979. . The gene for the 26S rRNA in Physarum contains two inser- tions. 
FEBS Lett  100, 347–350. .  Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    141 Guthrie, C., Abelson, J., 1982. . Organization and expression of tRNA genes in Saccharomyces cere- visiae. 
In: Strathern, J.N., Jones, E.W., Broach, J.R. . (Eds.), Molecular Biology of the Yeast,  Saccharomyces cerevisiae. . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, NY, pp. . 487–528   Guttes, E., Guttes, S., 1969. 
Thymidine incorporation by mitochondria in Physarum polycephalum. .  Science 145, 1057–1058. .  Hall, L., Braun, R., 1977. 
The organization of genes for transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA in amoe- bae and plasmodia of Physarum polycephalum. . Eur  J  Biochem  76, 165–174. .  Hardman, N., 1985. 
Molecular organization of the Physarum genome. . In: Dove, W.F., Dee, J.,  Hatano, S., Haugli, F.B., Wohlfarth-Botterman, K. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology of Physarum  polycephalum. 
Plenum Press, New York, NY/London, pp. . 39–66   Hendrickson, P.G., Silliker, M.E., 2010a. 
RNA editing in six mitochondrial ribosomal protein genes  of Didymium iridis. . Curr  Genet  56, 203–213. .  Hendrickson, P.G., Silliker, M.E., 2010b. 
RNA editing is absent in a single mitochondrial gene of  Didymium iridis. . Mycologia 102, 1288–1294. .  Horton, T., Landweber, L.F., 2000. 
Evolution of four types of RNA editing in myxomycetes. . RNA  6, 1339–1346. .  Johansen, S., Johansen, T., Haugli, F., 1992. . Structure and evolution of myxomycete nuclear group I  introns: a model for horizontal transfer by intron homing. 
Curr  Genet  22, 297–304. .  Jones, E.P., Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.R., Yang, Y.-C., Miller, D.L., 1990. 
Mitochondrial DNA  of Physarum: physical mapping, cloning, and transcription mapping. . Curr  Genet  17, 331–337. .  Katz, L.A., 2012. 
Origin and diversification of eukaryotes. . Annu  Rev  Microbiol  66, 411–427. .  Kawano, S., Takano, H., Mori, K., Kuriowa, T., 1991. 
A mitochondrial plasmid that promotes mito- chondrial fusion in Physarum polycephalum. . Protoplasma 160, 167–169. .  Kopp, D., 2012. 
Assembly of the Didymium iridis mitochondrial genome by genome walking. . Col- lege of Science and Health Theses and Dissertations, De Paul University Library, Chicago, IL. . Krishnan, U., Barsamian, A., Miller, D.L., 2007. 
Evolution of RNA editing sites in the mitochon- drial small subunit rRNA of the myxomycetes. . Methodos Enzymol. 
424, 197–220. .  Landweber, L.F., 1992. 
The evolution of RNA editing in kinetoplastid protozoa. . Biosystems 28, 41–45. .  Lazcano, A., Fastag, J., Gariglio, P., Ramirez, C., Oro, J., 1988. . On the early evolution of RNA  polymerase. 
J  Mol  Evol  27, 365–376. .  Le, P., Fisher, P.R., Barth, C., 2009. 
Transcription of the Dictyostelium discoideum mitochondrial  genome occurs from a single initiation site. . RNA 15, 2321–2330. .  Lonergan, K.M., Gray, M.W., 1993. 
Editing of transfer RNAs in Acanthamoeba castellani mito- chondria. . Science 259, 812–816. .  Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.S., Ghate, A., Ling, M.L., Jeng, K., Miller, D.L., 1994. 
Editing of  the mitochondrial small subunit rRNA in Physarum polycehalum. . EMBO J  13, 232–240. .  Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.S., Miller, D.L., 1991. 
RNA editing by cytidine insertion in mito- chondria of Physarum polycephalum. . Nature 349, 434–438. .  Maslov, D.A., Avila, H.A., Lake, J.A., Simpson, L., 1994. 
Evolution of RNA editing in kinetoplastid  protozoa. . Nature 368, 345–348. .  McCullough, C.H.R., Cooke, D.J., Foxon, S.L., Subbury, P.E., Grant, W.D., 1973. 
Nuclear DNA  content and senescence in Physarum polycephalum. . Nat  New Biol  245, 263–265. .  Melera, P.W., 1980. . Transcription in the myxomycete, Physarum polycephalum. . In: Dove, W.F.,  Rusch, H.P. 
(Eds.), Growth and Differentiation in Physarum polycephalum. . Princeton Univer- sity Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. . 64–97   Miller, D.L., 2014. . Mitochondrial genomes in Amoebozoa. 
In: Gray, M.W. . (Ed.), ASBMB Encyclo- pedia of Molecular Life Science, Mitochondrial Genomes. . Springer Science + Business Media,  New York, NY. 
 142     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Miller, M.L., Antes, T.J., Qian, F., Miller, D.L., 2006. . Identification of a putative mitochondrial  RNA polymerase from Physarum polycephalum: characterization, expression, purification and  transcription in vitro. 
Curr  Genet  49, 259–271. .  Miller, M.L., Miller, D.L., 2008. 
Non-DNA-templated addition of nucleotides to the 3′ end of  RNAs by the mitochondrial RNA Polymerase of Physarum polycephalum. . Mol  Cell Biol  28,  5795–5802. .  Miller, D.L., Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.S., Costandy, H., Ling, M.L., Yang, N., 1993a. 
Inser- tional editing in mitochondria of Physarum. . Semin  Cell Biol 4, 261–266. .  Miller, D.L., Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.S., Ling, M.L., Wang, S., Yang, N., Costandy, H.,  1993b. 
RNA editing in mitochondria of Physarum polycephalum. . In: Benne, R. . (Ed.), RNA  Editing: The Alteration of Protein Coding Sequences of RNA. 
Ellis Horwood, Chichester,  pp. . 87–103   Miller, D.L., Mahendran, R., Spottswood, M.S., Ling, M.L., Wang, S., Yang, N., Costandy, H.,  1993c. . RNA editing in mitochondria of Physarum polycephalum. 
In: Brennicke, A., Kuck, U. .  (Eds.), Plant Mitochondria. . VHC, Weinheim, pp. . 53–62   Milyutina, I.A., Aleshin, V.V., Mikrjukov, K.A., Kedrova, O.S., Petrov, N.B., 2001. 
The unusually  long small subunit ribosomal RNA gene found in amitochondriate amoeboflagellate Pelomyxa  palustris: its rRNA predicted structure and phylogenetic implication. . Gene 272, 131–139. .  Mohberg, J., 1977. 
Nuclear DNA content and chromosome numbers throughout the life cycle of the  Colonia strain of the myxomycete, Physarum polycephalum. . J  Cell Sci  24, 95–108. .  Mohberg, J., Babcock, K.L., Haugli, F.B., Rusch, H.P., 1973. 
Nuclear DNA content and chromo- some numbers in the myxomycete Physarum polycephalum. . Dev  Biol  34, 228–245. .  Mohberg, J., Rusch, H.P., 1971. 
Isolation and DNA content of nuclei of Physarum. . Exp  Cell Res   66, 305–316. .  Muscarella, D.E., Ellison, E.L., Rouff, B.M., Vogt, V.M., 1990. 
Characterization of I-Ppo, an intron- encoded endonuclease that mediates homing on a group I intron in the ribosomal DNA of  Physarum polycephalum. . Mol  Cell Biol  10, 3386–3396. .  Muscarella, D.E., Vogt, V.M., 1989. 
A mobile group I intron in the nuclear DNA of Physarum. . Cell  56, 443–454. .  Nakagawa, C.C., Jones, E.P., Miller, D.L., 1998. 
Mitochonrial DNA rearrangements associated with  mF plasmid integration and plasmodial longevity in Physarum polycephalum. . Curr  Genet  33,  178–187. .  Nandipati, S.C.R., Haugli, K., Coucheron, D.H., Haskins, E.F., Johansen, S.D., 2012. 
Polyphyletic  origin of the genus Physarum (Physarales, Myxomycetes) revealed by nuclear rDNA mini- chromosome analysis and group I intron synapomorphy. . BMC Evol  Biol  12, 166–175. .  Nomura, H., Moriyama, Y., Kawano, S., 2005. . Rearrangements in the Physarum polycephalum  mitochondrial genome associated with a transition from linear mF-mtDNA recombinants to  circular molecules. 
Curr  Genet  47, 100–110. .  Ogawa, S., Yoshino, R., Angata, K., Iwamoto, M., Pi, M., Kuroe, K., Matsuo, K., Morio, T.,  Urushihara, H., Yanagisawa, K., Tanaka, Y., 2000. 
The mitochondrial DNA of Dictyostelium  discoideum: complete sequence, gene content and genome organization. . Mol  Gen  Genet  263,  514–519. .  Price, D.H., Gray, M.W., 1998. 
Editing of tRNA. . In: Grosjean, H., Benne, R. . (Eds.), Modification  and Editing of RNA. 
ASM Press, Washington, DC, pp. . 289–305   Price, D.H., Gray, M.W., 1999. 
Confirmation of predicted edits and demonstration of unpredicted  edits in Acanthamoeba castellani mitochondrial tRNAs. . Curr  Genet  35, 23–29   Rhee, A.C., Somerlot, B.H., Parmi, N., Gott, J.M., 2009. . Distinct roles for sequences upstream of  and downstream from Physarum editing sites. . RNA 15, 1753–1765. 
 Genomics and Gene Expression in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 4    143 Roger, A.J., Simpson, A.G.B., 2008. . Evolution: revisiting the root of the eukaryotic tree. . Curr  Biol   19, R165–R167. 
 Schaap   P    Barrantes. .  I    Minx   P    Sasaki   N    Anderson   R W    Benard   M    Biggar   K K    Bu- chler. 
 N E    Bundschuh. .  R    Chen   X    Fronick   C    Fulton   L    Golderer   G    Jahn   N    Knoop    V    Landweber. .  L F    Maric   C    Miller   D L    Noegel   A    Peace   R    Pierron   G    Sasaki   T     Schallenberg-Rudinger. .  M    Schleicher. 
 M    Singh   R    Spaller   T    Storey   K B    Suzuki   T     Tomlinson. .  C    Tysom   J J    Warren   W C    Werner   E R    Werner-Felmayer. 
 G    Wilson   R K     Winkler   T    Gott   J M    Glockner   G    Marwan   W    2016  The Physarum polycephalum genome  reveals extensive use of prokaryotic two-component and metazoan-type tyrosine kinase signal- ing. . Genome Biol. 
Evol  8, 109–125. .  Shadwick, L.L., Spiegel, F.W., Shadwick, J.D.L., Brown, M.W., Silberman, J.D., 2009. 
 Eumycetozoa=Amoebozoa?: SSU rDNA phylogeny of prostelid slime molds and its signifi- cance for the amoebozoan supergroup. . PLoS One 4 (8), e6754. .  Simpson, L., Maslov, D.A., 1994. 
Ancient origin of RNA editing in kinetoplastid protozoa. . Curr   Opin  Genet  Dev  4, 887–894. .  Stuart, K.D., Schnaufer, A., Ernst, N.L., Panigrahi, A.K., 2005. 
Complex management: RNA editing  in Trypanosomes. . Trends Biochem. . Sci  30, 97–105. .  Takano, H., Abe, T., Sakurai, R., Moriyama, Y., Miyazawa, Y., Nozaki, H., Kawano, S., Sasaki,  N., Kuroiwa, T., 2001. 
The complete DNA sequence of the mitochondrial DNA of Physarum  polycephalum. . Mol  Gen  Genet  264, 539–545. .  Takano, H., Kawano, S., Kuriowa, T., 1992. . Constitutive homologous recombination between mi- tochondrial DNA and a linear mitochondrial plasmid in Physarum polycephalum. 
Curr  Genet   22, 221–227. .  Takano, H., Kawano, S., Kuriowa, T., 1994. . Complex terminal structure of a linear mitochondrial  plasmid from Physarum polycephalum: three terminal inverted repeats and an ORF encoding  DNA polymerase. 
Curr  Genet  25, 252–257. .  Takano, H., Mori, K., Kawano, S., Kuroiwa, T., 1996. 
Rearrangements of mitochondrial DNA and  the mitochondrial fusion-promoting plasmid (mF) are associated with defective mitochondrial  fusion in Physarum polycephalum. . Curr  Genet  29, 257–264. .  Traphagen, S.J., Dimarco, M.J., Silliker, M.E., 2010. 
RNA editing of 10 Didymium iridis mitochon- drial genes and comparison with the homologous genes in Physarum polycephalum. . RNA 16,  828–838. .  Vogt, V.M., Braun, R., 1976. 
Structure of ribosomal DNA in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Mol  Biol   106, 567–587. .  Page left intentionally blank 145 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00005-6 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 5 Molecular Techniques and  Current Research Approaches Laura M. . Walker*, Thomas Hoppe**, Margaret E. . Silliker† *Smith College. .  Clark Science Center. .  Northampton. .  MA   United States;   **Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology. 
 Ernst Moritz Arndt University. .  Greifswald. .   Germany; †DePaul University. 
 Chicago   IL   United States PART A: A SYNTHESIS OF THE CURRENT  KNOWLEDGE ON MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES  USED FOR THE RECORDING OF BIODIVERSITY  AND ECOLOGICAL ANALYSES INTRODUCTION Myxomycetes have been studied by scientists and enthusiasts since the  18th century (Chapter 2); throughout this time. .  the most commonly em- ployed method for studying myxomycete ecology has been the use of field   observations and moist chamber cultures. .  both of which were followed by  morphological identification of fruiting bodies. 
Although simple and cost ef- fective. .  these traditional methods do not account for the array of complex  life histories found throughout the group nor do they reveal reproductive  isolation within a morphologically defined species (morphospecies). .  thereby  limiting our understanding of myxomycete biodiversity and ecology (Walker  and Stephenson. 
 2016)  For example. .  some ubiquitous species of myxomy- cetes may have lost the ability to mate and to form fruiting bodies altogether   (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2010a)   thereby leaving them undetected by traditional  methods  (Chapter 1. 
 Fig  1.8 for a diagram of a typical myxomycete life cycle  and a thorough discussion of life cycle variations). . Although the proportion of  myxomycetes with incomplete life cycles is unknown. .  a recent environmen- tal sampling study of grassland soils suggests that the presence of all myxo- mycetes has been grossly underestimated by older. 
 more traditional methods   (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2016)  Molecular approaches offer alternative means of  study, and further reveal the biological complexity of these organisms. . 146     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology The first major movement toward molecular study of myxomycetes took  place in the late 1960s with the use of isozyme patterns to investigate rela- tionships between closely related species (Betterley and Collins. 
 1983; Franke. .   1967; Franke and Berry. .  1972; Franke et al.. 
 1968)  Attempts were made to  use isozyme profiles to distinguish between similar morphospecies and even  between different strains of a single morphospecies. . For example, Berry and   Franke (1973) observed that within a single morphospecies, Fuligo septica, dis- tinct isozyme patterns could be detected between white and yellow strains. . They  also outlined the limited information available for other species and strains. .   Isozyme patterns of 44 isolates of Didymium iridis correlated with three distinct  heterothallic breeding groups and many reproductively isolated nonheterothal- lic (probably apomictic) isolates (Betterley and Collins. 
 1983)  Although this  technique did make some early contributions. .  it soon became clear that the inter-  versus intraspecific variation repeatedly found within morphospecies limited its  usefulness in species delimitation outright (El Hage et al.. 
 2000; Franke. .  1973;  Franke and Berry. .  1972)   and the technique was eventually abandoned. 
The most influential development toward the use of molecular methods  came in the 1980s with DNA sequencing for the purpose of phylogenetic in- vestigations. . These early works were taxonomically limited and typically in- volved the sequencing of a limited number of gene sequences (Baldauf. 
 1999;  Baldauf and Doolittle. .  1997; Cavalier-Smith. 
 1993; Otsuka et al.. .  1983; Rusk  et al.. 
 1995)  Nonetheless, as more and more gene sequences emerged and the  evolutionary history of myxomycetes became more apparent, molecular bi- ology tools and applications were also rapidly advancing. . In 2003 DNA was  first successfully recovered from field-collected myxomycete fruiting bodies  (Martín et al.. 
 2003)   substantially increasing research possibilities. .  especially  since myxomycetes are notoriously difficult to culture. . Less than 10% are easily  cultivated in the laboratory (Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta, 2008). 
The use  of molecular methods to study myxomycetes is especially valuable because it  provides an alternative to the morphological identification of species of myxo- mycetes (the traditional and standard method of identification). . Morphological  identification of species is time consuming. 
 requires a substantial amount of  training. .  and   furthermore. 
 is complicated by morphological plasticity and the  presence of cryptic species (genetically distinct species with shared morphol- ogy) (Walker and Stephenson. .  2016)  Together these complications limit the  value of morphological data as a stand-alone method for identification of taxa. 
 Therefore, it is no surprise that molecular research methods have continued to  be pursued and enhanced over the years. . The ability to use field-collected myxomycetes as a source of DNA substan- tially increased the opportunities for molecular work due to a large quantity of  available herbarium specimens and the opportunities available to target myxo- mycetes in environmental samples and from any stage of the life cycle. . The  availability of molecular data and the use of various molecular techniques to  study myxomycetes have been on a steep and steady incline. . Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    147 NUCLEIC ACID ISOLATION DNA Isolation Nucleic acids can be isolated from any stage of the myxomycete life cycle (e.g.. 
  amoeboflagellates. .  plasmodia. .  or spores). 
The choice of which life stage and  nucleic acid depends upon the research question and the source of starting mate- rial. . Herein, we discuss the isolation of nucleic acids from the various myxomy- cete life stages and sample types. . Plasmodia represents one of two trophic stages in the myxomycete life   cycle. . A plasmodium contains up to 800,000 identical nuclei per mm3 (Gray  and Alexopoulos, 1968), and sometimes reaches considerable dimensions  (e.g., a meter or more in total extent in a few species). . Isolation of DNA from  this stage is easily performed with an alkaline lysis protocol (Birnboim and  Doly. .  1979; Winter. 
 2016) and therefore is an especially good source for the  isolation of large quantities of genetic material. . Amoeboflagellate cells repre- sent the other of the two trophic stages in the myxomycete life cycle. . Similar to  plasmodia, amoeboflagellate cells can be used to easily isolate genetic material. .  Amoeboflagellate cells are smaller (on an average approximately 10 µM), and  typically contain a single nucleus. . The isolation of nucleic acids from amoebo- flagellate cells can be especially valuable in the context of single-cell isolations  and environmental sampling. . An alternative method can be used for both amoe- boflagellates and plasmodia (Silliker et al., 2002); a longer lysis period for the  plasmodial stage reduces carbohydrate contamination. 
Spore-containing fruiting bodies are the most commonly used source of  nucleic acids, particularly, DNA. . Isolation of DNA from fruiting bodies is es- pecially valuable because the molecular data can be directly interpreted in light  of morphological identification of myxomycetes (species). 
 which can only be  carried out with mature fruiting bodies. . However   unless the fruiting bodies  have been generated through sterile. .  axenic culture. 
 it is important to consider  the possibility of contaminating DNA (e.g.. .  from fungi or other myxomycetes)  that may be present inside or on the surface of the fruiting body. . Microcysts   represent the remaining life stage from which nucleic acids can be isolated. . Both  spores and microcysts (a resting stage formed by amoeboflagellate cells) are two  resistant stages in the myxomycete life cycle that can remain viable for long pe- riods of time (Stephenson and Feest. .  2012)  Because spores and microcysts can- not be easily broken with enzymatic treatments, they must instead be physically  disrupted to release genetic material for isolation. . The most common method for  breaking spore and microcyst walls is manual disruption using a sterile pestle or  homogenization in the presence of glass beads. .  sand   or another similar mate- rial (Hoppe et al.. 
 2010)  Disruption of the cell wall in this way can be used to  isolate nucleic acids from a very small number of spores or microcysts to many  thousands of spores from a mature. .  spore-containing fruiting body. 
Although there are no commercially available nucleic acid isolation kits spe- cifically designed for myxomycetes at this time. .  a variety of kits are available  148     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology that can be used to isolate and purify myxomycete nucleic acids. 
Isolation kit  protocols typically begin with a cell disruption/homogenization stage in a pro- tective lysis buffer. . Often times, the kits can be modified (and often with advice  from the manufacturer) to best suit the researchers needs based on the sample  type. . For example. 
 many researchers have found success with the use of DNA  isolation kits that were initially developed for the isolation of plant tissues or  stool samples. .  simply by modifying the lysis step to include a bead-shaking step  to break open spore cell walls. 
RNA Isolation Unlike genomic DNA. .  which can be isolated from both active and inactive cells  (as well as cell-free DNA) in a sample. 
 the isolation of RNA allows one to view  the genes that are being actively transcribed. . So where DNA analyses can be used  to identify the presence of a certain taxon, RNA analyses measure gene expres- sion and may suggest the functional role of a gene or taxon. . Transcriptome anal- yses of individual cells and metatranscriptomes of communities are extremely  powerful tools with great potential for studying myxomycetes. 
To date, however,  far fewer groups have undertaken RNA analyses as compared to DNA analysis. . The isolation of RNA requires greater care than the isolation of DNA be- cause it is far more easily degraded. . For example, samples need to be prepared  in a sterile and RNase-free environment. 
These precautions are not specific to  myxomycetes; therefore, a great deal of literature is available for one to learn  best practices. . Otherwise, in principle, the isolation of RNA from myxomycetes  is very similar to the isolation of DNA. . Like DNA   RNA can potentially be  isolated from any stage of the myxomycete life cycle. .  although obviously tran- scription levels will be drastically different between the different stages (e.g.. 
  active versus resting). .  so again   the choice of the appropriate life stage is depen- dent upon the research question. 
As described earlier for DNA isolation kits, a  variety of RNA isolation kits are commercially available and can be modified  for use with myoxmycetes (Kamono et al., 2009). . NUCLEIC ACID AMPLIFICATION AND APPLICATIONS Nucleic acid amplification with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) allows a  quick and easy generation of an exponential number of copies of a targeted gene  sequence. . Amplified target sequences can then be used in a number of down- stream applications (e.g., DNA cloning and sequencing to generate gene trees  for phylogenetics and ecological surveys). . In the following section some of the  gene sequences most commonly targeted for amplification will be described. 
Ribosomal Small Subunit (SSU) The most widely used gene for molecular analysis in the myxomycetes is the  ribosomal small subunit (SSU) RNA gene. . Across many major taxa the SSU  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    149 is an extremely slowly evolving gene. .  making it very important in phyloge- netic studies. .  among other applications. . In contrast. 
 the myxomycete SSU is a  highly variable marker and contains a large number of group I introns of various  lengths (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2010b   2012; Nandipati et al.. .  2012; Pawlowski  et al.. .  2012; Shadwick et al.. 
 2009)  Due to a large number of introns, full-length sequences of the myxomycete  SSU can be difficult to obtain, especially with a single PCR. . However, many  researchers target an intron-free region in the 5´ SSU of approximately 750 bp  in length that can be amplified with a single pair of PCR primers (Fiore-Donno  et al., 2012). 
This region of the myxomycete SSU has proven powerful in the  context of phylogenetics and particularly in ecological studies (Fiore-Donno  et al., 2016; Novozhilov et al., 2013a). . Intraspecific SSU sequence variation  can be significant between clades and even between multiple isolates of a single  myxomycete morphospecies from a single population. 
When SSU sequence  data are viewed parallel to morphological data. .  one may find identical SSU  sequences for multiple collections of a single morphospecies (Fiore-Donno  et al.. 
 2011) or alternatively. .  SSU sequence diversity can be twice as great as  morphological diversity (Novozhilov et al.. .  2013b)  Elongation Factor-1α Elongation factor-1α (EF-1α) is another commonly sequenced gene in myxo- mycetes. . Due to its role in protein synthesis. .  EF-1α is highly conserved  (Baldauf. .  1999)   and is therefore especially valuable for constructing myxomy- cete phylogenetic trees (Baldauf and Doolittle. 
 1997; Feng and Schnittler. .  2015;  Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2005; Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2010b)  The nearly complete se- quence of EF-1α of Physarum polycephalum can be amplified with a single pair  of universal primers (Baldauf and Doolittle 1997). .  although multiple primer  pairs are often required for other taxa (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2005; Hoppe and  Kutschera. .  2010)  Furthermore. 
 primers can be designed across an insertion that  is found solely in animals and fungi (Baldauf and Palmer. .  1993)   thereby elimi- nating any contamination by fungal or animal DNA (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2005)  Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) lies between the small and large subunits  of the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequences and contains the fastest evolv- ing region of the rRNA in many organisms (White et al.. 
 1990)  Therefore    where the slowly evolving EF-1α sequence has been most useful for determin- ing deeper evolutionary relationships. .  ITS have proven to be valuable for ana- lyzing intraspecific variation in some taxa. . ITS was the first molecular marker  to be examined for the purpose of identifying intraspecific variation in myxo- mycetes (Martín et al., 2003; Winsett, 2010). . However   unlike the successful  use of ITS sequencing in fungi (Schoch et al.. .  2012; White et al.. 
 1990) and  150     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology some other groups. 
 the use of ITS sequence analysis in myxomycetes has been  rather limited. . Myxomycete ITS sequences can be extremely variable in both  sequence and length (Winsett and Stephenson. .  2008) and in many cases cannot  even be aligned among closely related taxa (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2011; Martín  et al.. 
 2003)  The high level of sequence variation limits its usefulness as a  stand-alone marker in the myxomycetes. .  although as a supplementary marker  it can be valuable for differentiating between some species (Baba et al.. 
 2015;  Winsett and Stephenson 2008). . Cytochrome c Oxidase (COI) Due to its high rate of evolution. .  and its universality among eukaryotes (mito- chondriate). .  the Cytochrome c Oxidase (COI) gene was proposed as a barcod- ing marker that could aid in the identification of all already known species and  as a way to reveal previously unknown biodiversity (Brown et al.. 
 1979; Hebert  et al.. .  2003; Moore. 
 1995)  However, in myxomycetes success with use of the  COI gene sequence has been limited due to the high levels of sporadic variation  among lineages. . The universal primers proposed for COI barcoding (Folmer et al.. 
 1994) do  not reliably amplify myxomycete DNA. .  and even with primers specifically de- signed to amplify the first half of the myxomycete COI (Walker et al.. 
 2011)   se- quences can be difficult to obtain and provide varying results (Feng and Schnit- tler. .  2015; Liu et al.. .  2015)  Similar to ITS. 
 when COI is used as a supplemental  tool. .  it has proven successful for some amoebae (Nassonova et al.. .  2010) and  other protists (Barth et al.. .  2006; Chantangsi et al.. .  2007; Evans et al.. 
 2007)  It  is possible that COI sequencing in the myxomycetes will prove to have some  applications; however. .  the application does not seem to be in the broad identi- fication of species as has been suggested. .  nor can it be used for reconstructing  deeper evolutionary relationships among myxomycetes. 
Sequencing and Applications of Gene Amplification DNA sequencing has undergone substantial changes since the earliest technolo- gies were developed in the 1960s (Heather and Chain, 2016). . No matter the  technology utilized, the goal remains to determine the order and composition of  nucleotides in a piece of DNA. . The ability to decode DNA sequences is now an  essential tool in biological research as it can be used to infer a variety of infor- mation. .  such as biochemical properties and phylogenetic relationships. 
The first  sequences of myxomycete origin were generated in the context of phylogenetic  studies (Baldauf and Doolittle, 1997). . These early studies were limited by the  sequencing technology of the time and the availability of myxomycete DNA. .  Now it is possible to obtain myxomycete DNA from any life stage, either from  individual isolates or from communities represented in environmental samples. 
 And with drastically improved sequencing methods. .  it is now possible to obtain  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    151 millions of reads from a sample with the use of high-throughput sequencing  (HTS). . In this section, several applications are described that utilize one or more  DNA sequencing technologies (Sanger sequencing or HTS technology) to study  myxomycete biodiversity or ecology. . Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (TRFLP) Terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (TRFLP) is based upon the  presence of specific PCR-fragment lengths for individual genotypes after diges- tion with a restriction enzyme (Fig. 
5 1)  This technique allows a quick and eco- nomical way to compare different communities; it has been used to investigate  prokaryotic and fungal communities (Hoppe and Schnittler, 2015). . In TRFLP fluorescently labeled PCR primers are designed to target and am- plify a gene of interest. . The resulting amplicons are subjected to digestion with  a restriction enzyme, which identifies sequence polymorphisms and results in  fragments of various lengths. . The fluorescently labeled fragments are then frac- tionated using a DNA sequencer (Liu et al., 1997). . TRFLP with myxomycete  SSU was used to identify substrate specific variation in myxomycete communi- ties (Hoppe and Schnittler, 2015). 
Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE) Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) is a technique that has been  used to separate a mixture of DNA fragments according to their melting point. .   to analyze microbial communities without cultivation. . This technique was first  used for investigations of prokaryotic communities (Muyzer et al.. 
 1993) but  was later adopted to detect the presence of airborne myxomycetes (Kamono  and Fukui. .  2006) and to investigate myxomycete communities inhabiting the  soil (Kamono and Fukui. 
 2006)  Similar to TRFLP, primers are first designed  to amplify target gene sequences from the samples of interest (typically SSU  for myxomycetes). . Next, PCR products are run along a urea gradient in a poly- acrylamide gel to separate fragments. . Partially melted products migrate more  slowly than compact molecules through the gel, allowing the detection of se- quence variation. 
FIGURE 5.1 Workflow of a terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. .  (1) Soil community with three different ribotypes (A. .  B   and C)   (2) amplification of a homologous  gene and labeling of the ends. .  (3) digestion with restriction enzyme to reveal length polymorphism  by. .  and (4) visualization of the different sized fragments. 
152     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Not only is this method valuable for making a visual comparison of commu- nities (similar to a fingerprint). 
 but also   well-separated bands can be extracted  from the gel to be sequenced and identified. . By isolating and sequencing bands  from a DGGE analysis, Ko et al. 
(2009) generated 13 new SSU sequences from  decaying wood and leaves on the forest floor. . DGGE is still a valuable tool for  obtaining environmental sequences, allowing for detection and even identifi- cation of myxomycetes without the requirement of a fruiting body. 
However,  many find this technique to be clumsy and rather time consuming. . Additionally,  as sequencing technologies improve and prices decline, DGGE analysis is de- clining in popularity as more and more researchers turn to HTS. . High-Throughput Sequencing Unlike Sanger sequencing, the latest generation of truly HTS technologies  allows one to simultaneously generate millions of sequences (Kircher and   Kelson, 2010). . Several HTS sequencers are currently available (e.g.. .  Illumina’s  MiSeq and Life Technologies’ Ion Torrent); the various technologies utilized by  each continue to increase the ease and accuracy of generating large amounts of  sequence data with reduced time and cost (Heather and Chain. 
 2016)   Examples  of HTS technologies being utilized to study myxomycetes are only now emerg- ing but show great promise. . The first published example of HTS of myxomycetes was by Fiore-Donno  et al. . (2016), wherein the authors investigated natural populations of myxomy- cetes and Acanthamoeba in soils from three sites across Germany. 
The authors  obtained more than 900,000 reads. . Stringent filtering of the myxomycete reads  was applied to remove poor quality reads. 
 duplicates. .  and chimeras; the au- thors identified 338 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) which represented 35  unique BLAST hits. . These hits represent 10 myxomycete genera and 2 uniden- tified taxa. . Their study confirms that myxomycetes are abundant soil predators  in grassland soils and also identified a biogeographic pattern of the communities  between the three sites investigated. 
As this example highlights, the use of HTS technology is likely to have a  great impact on the study of myxomycetes. . Until recently, myxomycetes could  be identified only through morphology of the fruiting body. . Therefore   speci- mens in the soil (or any microhabitat) that have lost the ability to form fruit- ing bodies or could not be cultured to fruiting body formation for any reason. .   could not be identified or enumerated. 
However, when total DNA is isolated  from an environmental sample, all life stages of the individuals present can  be detected, eliminating the requirement for a mature fruiting body. . Targeted  environmental sequencing in this way allows a glimpse into the whole, natu- ral myxomycete community. . There are still limitations with the use of HTS  and environmental sequencing that need to be considered and improved upon,  such as PCR bias and a limited number of reference sequences. . Nonetheless. 
  implementation of HTS particularly with environmental samples will allow us  to gain information about hitherto unknown communities. .  genetic diversity. .   Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    153 and will likely reveal undescribed species (especially uncultivable and rare or  non-fruiting species). . CONCLUDING REMARKS Although the use of molecular techniques for studying myxomycetes occurred  rather late in comparison to most other groups of organisms. 
 already signifi- cant advances have been made. . DNA sequencing of conserved genes for phy- logenetic reconstruction has revealed the monophyly of the myxomycetes and  their placement on the eukaryotic tree of life in the Amoebozoan clade (Adl  et al.. .  2005; Baldauf and Doolittle. .  1997; Cavalier-Smith. 
 1998; Fiore-Donno  et al.. .  2005   2010b; Shadwick et al.. 
 2009)  Molecular gene trees have con- firmed the presence of two major groups of myxomycetes commonly referred  to as the dark and bright-spored clades (Cavalier-Smith, 2013; Fiore-Donno  et al., 2005). . Molecular data are also revealing unexpected branching patterns  which in many cases contrast with previous understanding of myxomycete phy- logeny based largely on morphological data within both the dark-spored (Fiore- Donno et al.. .  2008   2012) and bright-spored clades (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2013;  Leontyev et al.. .  2014; Walker et al.. 
 2015)  The sequence of the very first complete myxomycete genome (of Physarum  polycephalum) was recently reported (Schaap et al., 2016). . This is a significant  accomplishment and provides a wealth of valuable data for various areas of  study. 
 from myxomycete physiology to our understanding of the last common  ancestor of all eukaryotes. . DNA sequencing has also revealed the existence of  at least one non-fruiting group of myxomycetes, the previously named “hyper- amoebae” (Fiore-Donno et al., 2010a; Walochnik et al., 2004). . The high level of  genetic diversity identified in natural populations of myxomycetes hints toward  the existence of cryptic species (Aguilar et al., 2014;  Novozhilov et al., 2013b). 
 From the early environmental studies that utilized DGGE and TRFLP. .  we  learned about the diversity of myxomycetes inhabiting soils (Kamono and   Fukui. .  2006) and the importance of wind-dispersal of spores  (Kamono and  Fukui. .  2006)  More recently. 
 environmental soil samples have been subject to  metatranscriptomics (Geisen et al.. .  2015; Urich et al.. .  2008) and targeted se- quencing approaches (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2016) utilizing HTS to reveal the  great abundance and diversity of myxomycetes in those microhabitats. . As HTS  technologies continue to increase. .  the availability and amount of data that can  be generated. .  the processing and analyses of the resulting data has become more  and more complex and computer intensive. 
However, due to a significant value  of such techniques, efforts should focus on improving the use of this technol- ogy for the study of myxomycetes. . Annotated reference sequence databases  are particularly in need of expansion. . Also, the use of single-cell genomics and  transcriptomics should be investigated. . The use and improvement upon the  techniques described herein and other newly emerging. 
 powerful methods will  allow us to gain a deeper understanding of myxomycete habitat preference and  biogeography. . 154     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology PART B: COMPARATIVE MOLECULAR BIOLOGY  AND USE OF MYXOMYCETES AS MODEL ORGANISMS MYXOMYCETES AS MODEL ORGANISMS: PROMISES. 
  DISAPPOINTMENTS. .  AND DISCOVERIES The peculiar biology of P. . polycephalum and its myxomycete relatives has  often  promised opportunities for making progress in understanding basic eukaryotic  cell and molecular biology; however. 
 various experimental challenges have fre- quently defeated the fulfillment of these promises. . Yet   the continued study of  this organism and its relatives has yielded unexpected biological wonders. .  such  as complex mobile introns. .  unique RNA editing patterns in the mitochondria  (reviewed in Chapter 4). 
 and “brainless” coordinated activity (Chapter 11). . In an excellent review of P. . polycephalum biology, Burland et al. 
(1993b)  conjectured: “Were Jane Austen a late 20th-century molecular biologist. .  she  might well write a novel. .  as she did nearly two centuries ago. .  entitled Pride  and Prejudice. 
 modifying the first sentence only slightly. .  to read… It is a truth  universally acknowledged that a single-celled organism in possession of good  cell biology must be in want of DNA transformation.” Were Jane Austen a 21st-century molecular biologist. .  her character would  surely be in want of a genome. 
This section reviews molecular work done most- ly with P. . polycephalum in the absence of a seamless transformation system  and reference genome. 
The recent publication of the P. . polycephalum genome  (Schaap et al.. .  2016)   transcriptome data (Barrantes et al.. 
 2010   2012; Bund- schuh et al.. .  2011; Glöckner et al.. .  2008   2016; Watkins and Gray. 
 2008)   and  the ability to disrupt gene function by RNAi (Haindl and Holler. .  2005; Materna  and Marwan. .  2005; Pinchai et al.. .  2006) bring renewed motivation and tools for  pursuing the study of P. 
polycephalum and its relatives. . The Cell Cycle Rusch (1980) described seizing upon P. . polycephalum in the 1950s as the ideal  research organism for studying cancer since the synchronous mitotic divisions in  the one-celled. .  massive   multinucleated plasmodium should allow biochemical  dissection of the cell cycle and then factors which disrupt regulated cell  division. 
 Early on, a phosphorylating activity was found in P. .  polycephalum plasmodia  that fluctuated during the cell cycle and could be a mitotic trigger (Bradbury  et al., 1974). . Detailed descriptions were made of the mitotic cycle; experiments  manipulated the timing of the cycle by somatically fusing plasmodia at differ- ent stages (Holt. 
 1980; Rusch et al.. .  1966; Wolf and  Sauer. 
 1982)  However, by  1985 researchers were frustrated at the lack of established cell cycle mutants in  P. . polycephalum (Laffler and Tyson, 1986). . An understanding of the cell cycle  was instead obtained by working with other organisms (Nurse, 2000), but sub- sequent work confirms that cell cycle control in P. .  polycephalum is similar to  most eukaryotes (Ducommun et al., 1990; Li et al., 2004; Schaap et al., 2016). 
 Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    155 With new tools and genomic data, cell cycle studies with P. . polycelphalum  may be worth revisiting, particularly with respect to regulation of closed versus  open mitosis that occurs at different stages of the life cycle (Solnica-Krezel  et al., 1991). 
Somatic Incompatibility Systems Observations of Didymium iridis (Collins, 1966) and P. . polycephalum  (Carlile  and Dee, 1967) revealed that diploid plasmodia could fuse. . Since plasmo- dia engulf food, they must be able to meet and fuse with themselves around  a food source. . When two compatible haploid myxamoebal clones are mixed,  the resulting plasmodial population is genetically identical and can also fuse. 
 Extensive studies with both D. . iridis and P. . polycephalum have defined the  incompatibility systems that govern self/nonself recognition between plasmo- dia (for reviews. 
 see Carlile and Gooday. .  1978; Collins and Betterley. .  1982;  Schrauwen. .  1984)  In both D  iridis and P. 
polycephalum multiple compatibility  loci were identified. . Differences at strong loci result in fast avoidance reactions  while differences at weak loci cause a slow response that allows some cytoplas- mic mixing and cytotoxicity in the fusion region. . In some cases, the plasmodia  appear to fuse compatibly but ultimately one of the nuclear types is eliminated  (Carlile and Gooday, 1978). . These genetic studies have not been pursued at the  molecular level, though a study by Schrauwen (1979) presents evidence that  incompatibility reactions trigger new gene expression. . While these observations have not greatly contributed to our understand- ing of cell–cell recognition, they have provided a useful tool for studying cer- tain biological processes. . For example. 
 fusions between plasmodia at different  stages in the cell cycle resulted in synchronous mitosis at a time intermediate to  what would be predicted for the individual plasmodia (Rusch et al.. .  1966)  Plas- modial fusions have also been used to perform complementation experiments  between sporulation mutants, or between plasmodia that have been differently  induced to sporulate. . These studies are described later in the section on develop- ment (Marwan, 2003a,b; Marwan et al., 2005; Sujatha et al., 2005). 
Plasmodial  fusions between plasmodia of different ages, age heterokaryons, have been used  to study senescence in D. . iridis (Clark and Hakim, 1980; Clark and Lott, 1989;  Collins and Betterley, 1982). 
Fragmented microplasmodia fuse to form net- works in a pattern consistent with general network theory (Fessel et al., 2012). .  The plasmodium, and its ability to readily undergo somatic fusions, provides a  unique tool for studying cell biology. . Plasmodial Structure, Motility, Behavior, and Learning The spectacular multinucleate plasmodium is a defining feature of the myxo- mycetes. . A review by Kessler (1982) focusing on P. 
polycephalum, sum- marized what was known about the structure and mechanism of plasmodial  156     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology motility up to that time. . The unicellular, multinucleate plasmodium is orga- nized into an ectoplasmic gel layer that defines the tubular channels surround- ing the fluid sol endoplasm. . The plasma membrane is highly invaginated and  closely associated with internal fibrils that are longitudinally and radially ar- rayed along the vein-like tubules. 
Actin- and myosin-powered contractions  create hydraulic pressure within the tubules, which move the endoplasm at  velocities as high as 1.3 mm/sec. . The mass flow of cytoplasm is then reversed,  resulting in shuttle-streaming. . The timing of flow reversals occurs about every  1.5 min, though net flow is in the direction of movement. . Macroscopically,   a migrating plasmodium appears as an advancing intricate fan of protoplasm  with trailing veins. 
The probable role of calcium in controlling the contrac- tions was proposed (Kessler, 1982). . Yoshiyama et al. 
(2010) experimentally  showed the relationship between internal calcium concentrations and con- traction–relaxation. . Kessler (1982) proposed a stretch entrainment model to  explain the rhythm of contractions. . More recent work refined the reciprocal  relationship between cell shape and contraction (Nakagaki et al.. .  2000b) and  models of plasmodial morphology in relation to force (Alim et al.. 
 2013;  Lewis et al.. .  2015)  While early studies concentrated on plasmodial chemotaxis in relation to  various attractants and repellents (Ueda and Kobatake. .  1982)   the focus has  shifted to viewing the plasmodium as a decision making adaptive network. .  with  primitive learning. 
Nakagaki et al. . have demonstrated how P. 
polycephalum  plasmodia reorganize their structure to maximize foraging efficiency. . In one ex- periment. .  a plasmodium was grown to fill a maze; when a food source was po- sitioned at the entrance and exit of the maze. .  the plasmodium reorganized itself  to mass upon the food sources but remain connected through the maze by the  shortest distance (Nakagaki et al.. .  2000a)  Regions of the plasmodium inhabit- ing dead ends in the maze were retracted to decrease the path length between  the food sources. 
Similar experiments were conducted with two. .  three   and mul- tiple food sources (Nakagaki et al.. .  2001   2004; Tero et al.. 
 2010); the behavior  determining computational calculations of plasmodia have been described by  mathematical models (Tero et al.. .  2006   2010)  In further studies, plasmodia  were confronted with multiple kinds of inputs. . Latty and Beekman (2010) chal- lenged plasmodia to discriminate between high- and low-quality food sources  in a shaded environment. . When the higher quality food was in a lighted envi- ronment. 
 which plasmodia typically avoid. .  they showed that plasmodia would  “risk” foraging in the lighted area. 
 but only when the reward was significant  (5 times greater food concentration). . They called this “behavioral titration,”  indicating that plasmodia were making multiobjective foraging decisions. 
  Remarkably, Dussutour et al. . (2010) showed that P. 
polycephalum plasmodia  would select different nutrient food patches that precisely optimized its nutri- tional requirements. . More complicated decision making scenarios  (Beekman  and Latty, 2015; Reid et al., 2016) highlight the multiple sensory inputs that  need to be integrated. . It is perhaps no surprise that the genome of this adaptive  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    157 foraging organism has been found to be highly enriched in genes for sensory  receptors and signaling pathways (Schaap et al.. .  2016)  Group I Introns in the Myxomycetes The myxomycetes are a rich source of nuclear group I introns; their study  has provided insights into their modes of dispersal and evolution. .  as well as  their biological mechanisms and functions. 
 (Haugen et al.. .  2005; Hedberg and   Johansen. .  2013; Nielsen and Johansen. 
 2009)  Group I introns are identified  by their characteristic secondary and tertiary structures; however. .  within this  major class of introns distinctive subgroups exist (Michel and Westhof. .  1990;  Zhou et al.. 
 2008)  Nuclear group I introns (as opposed to those that occur in  mitochondria, chloroplasts, or viruses) occur only in the ribosomal DNA genes  of eukaryotic microbes (Hedberg and Johansen, 2013). . Introns were first discovered in the myxomycetes in the large subunit (LSU)  ribosomal DNA (rDNA) genes of P. . polycelphalum by DNA/RNA hybridiza- tion and electron microscopy (Gubler et al., 1979). 
Johansen et al. . (1992) de- termined the secondary structure of these group I introns in P. . polycephalum  along with two homologous introns in D. 
iridis that had similar secondary  structures and identical insertion locations within the LSU rDNA gene. . As  more sequence data accumulated (Vader et al., 1994; Wikmark et al., 2007),  it became clear that the introns first discovered in P. . polycephalum occur  throughout the Physarales in the LSU rDNA genes at base pair positions 1949  and 2449 (this is based on the numbering system in the E. . coli LSU rDNA  gene; Raue et al., 1988). . Phylogenies of the Physarales based on introns at  LSU positions L1949 and L2449 are in agreement with the LSU rDNA phy- logeny of host strains. .  suggesting that the introns were present in the ancestor  of the Physarales and that the introns are vertically inherited within this group  (Wikmark et al.. .  2007)  A phylogenetic analysis of the Physarales based on  the nuclear large and small (LSU and SSU) rDNA sequences indicated that  the Physaraceae is actually polyphyletic. 
 consisting of three distinct clades   (Nandipati et al.. .  2012)  Interestingly, variation in a conserved region of the  LSU L2449 intron in members of the Physaraceae also supported the three  clades. . Within the Didymiaceae (another family within the Physarales) the  core conserved regions of the L1949 and L2449 introns are nearly identical;  however. 
 the peripheral loop regions show significant variation of possible  taxonomic value (Wikmark et al.. .  2007)  Another group I intron was found  exclusively in the Didymiaceae at position 1389 of the SSU (S1389); it appears  to be vertically inherited within this group (Wikmark et al., 2007). . Other recent  papers have demonstrated the utility of introns in revealing cryptic species  within morphological species (Feng et al., 2016; Feng and Schnittler, 2015). .  Known insertion sites for nuclear group I introns in the myxomycetes have  been summarized by Nandipati et al. . (2012)  Some of these are obligatory and  vertically inherited, whereas others are optional. 
158     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Sporadically occurring. 
 optional group I introns. .  located at certain fixed  positions in the rDNA. .  are present in very diverse organismal groups. 
For ex- ample. .  the S516 group I intron found in the SSU of Fuligo septica. .  Badhamia  gracilis. .  and Physarum flavicomum (Fse.S516. .  Bgr S516   and Pfl.S516. 
 respec- tively) appears to be related to S516 introns found in amoebae and brown algae  (Haugen et al.. .  2003)  An emerging understanding of the biology of introns is  beginning to explain their distribution and evolution. . The vertically inherited  introns discussed earlier are not self-splicing in vitro, and instead are likely de- pendent on host proteins for splicing. 
The persistence of these introns may even  argue that they have evolved to benefit the host (Hedberg and Johansen, 2013;  Nielsen and Johansen, 2009). . Vertically inherited introns may represent an endpoint in a cycle proposed  by Goddard and Burt (1999), see also Haugen et al. . (2005) and Nielsen and   Johansen (2009). 
The cycle begins with an initial intron acquisition by hori- zontal transmission catalyzed by an intron encoded homing endonuclease gene  (HEG). . Once present in the genome, intron-lacking rDNA genes are converted  into intron-containing genes by the activity of the homing endonuclease. 
The  homing endonuclease makes a double-stranded DNA break at the target site  that is then repaired by gene conversion to include the intron. . Once all of the  intron-lacking genes are converted to intron-containing genes, the activity of  the endonuclease may be lost by mutation over time. . Subsequent loss of the  intron may occur or it may be stably/vertically inherited. . Hedberg and Johansen  (2013) reviewed different types of myxomycete group I introns that could rep- resent these various stages proposed by Goddard and Burt (1999). . One other mode of horizontal transmission has been identified involving  an RNA intermediate. 
Haugen et al. . (2003), working with F. 
septica   showed  the presence in vitro of a circular RNA molecule containing the full-length in- tron which could be a substrate for reverse-splicing or retro-homing. .  where- by the RNA is reverse transcribed into DNA and inserted into the genome. 
 The F  septica Fse.S516 intron does not contain an HEG, but it is related to  other HEG containing introns, so it may represent a degenerate homing intron   (Haugen et al., 2003). . Another D  iridis intron Di.S956-1 (discussed in detail  further) appears to use both DNA and RNA mediated modes of transmission  (Birgisdottir and Johansen, 2005). . F  septica has been found to contain twelve  group I introns in its rDNA genes. 
 all of which are non-HEG containing. .  and    all but the vertically inherited L1949 and L2449 introns. .  are self-splicing   (Lundblad et al.. 
 2004)  Twenty group I introns have been found in the rDNA  genes of Diderma niveum, representing the various types of introns discussed  so far (Nielsen and Johansen, 2009). . Two myxomycete introns in particular have contributed to the larger discus- sion of intron biology. . The first of these (Ppl.L1925) is a strain-specific group I  intron found in P. . polycephalum, which exactly matches the insertion site of a  self-splicing group I intron in the well-studied ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila  (Cech and Bass, 1986; Muscarella and Vogt, 1989). 
The core structure of the  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    159 introns in both groups were similar; however, only the P. . polycephalum intron  was shown to encode a site-specific endonuclease capable of making a double- stranded cut at the intron insertion site (Muscarella et al., 1990). . Further   they  showed evidence for intron transposition in matings between intron-containing  and intron-lacking strains. .  resulting in the conversion of intron-lacking sites  (Muscarella and Vogt. .  1989)  The Ppl.L1925 intron (see Johansen and Haugen  (2001) for group I intron nomenclature) has been intensively studied as the first  nuclear transposable/mobile group I intron. . The intron-encoded endonuclease  I-Ppo has been characterized (Muscarella et al.. 
 1990); when the intron was  expressed in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. .  it led to transposition into the  yeast rDNA gene where it retained its mobility (Muscarella and Vogt. 
 1993)  The second group I intron of note is Dir.S956-1 found in D. . iridis  When  first described (Johansen and Vogt, 1994), three components were identified in  Dir.S956-1, two ribozymes and one open reading frame (ORF). . It was thought  that this compound intron was formed by an intron inserting into another intron  to create a twintron. . Dir.S956-1 was the first example of a group I twintron  (Decatur et al., 1995). 
Further studies (Decatur et al., 1995) characterized the  activities of the two ribozymes, GIR1 and GIR2 (the ORF is between the two  ribozymes). . The GIR2 ribozyme showed the typical group I activity involved  in intron self-splicing. . The GIR1 ribozyme appeared to be involved in process- ing or expression of the I-DirI endonuclease encoded by the ORF. . The authors  noted that protein coding mRNAs are typically transcribed by RNA polymerase  II and further processed in preparation for translation. 
 however   rDNA genes. .   and their introns. 
 are transcribed by RNA polymerase I where the transcript is  the final end product. . This raised questions about the mode of processing of the  I-DirI transcript. . In vivo   the Dir.S956-1 intron was shown to be mobile and able to convert  intron-lacking rDNA genes into intron-containing genes in matings between  intron+ and intron− haploid strains (Johansen et al.. .  1997)  When I-DirI was  expressed in E. 
coli, a site-specific endonuclease could be isolated that cleaved  intron-lacking DNA at the intron insertion site. . The maturation of the I-DirI  mRNA was further elucidated by Vader et al. . (1999)  The GIR1 ribozyme ap- peared to be responsible for cleaving itself from the I-DirI transcript. . Then the  I-DirI transcript is processed by truncation at the 3′ end and polyadenylation. . In  addition, a small intron was spliced from the I-DirI transcript. 
This suggested  that the GIR1 ribozyme’s role was a first step in maturation of the I-DirI tran- script, resulting in a substrate for the RNA polymerase II processing pathway. .  In fact, the GIR1 ribozyme cleaves by a transesterification branching reaction,  which forms a three-nucleotide lariat on the 5′ end of the released endonuclease  transcript (Nielsen et al., 2005). . The authors proposed that the small lariat (or  lariat cap) would stabilize the mRNA in a way similar to the me7-G-cap added  to the 5′ end of RNAs transcribed by RNA polymerase II. 
Remarkably. .  the sequence of the processes described earlier is regulated by  a conformational switch. .  or riboswitch. 
 in the Di.S956-1 intron (Nielsen and  160     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Johansen. 
 2009)  When the intron is transcribed a hairpin structure called HEG  P1 (homing endonuclease gene P1) is formed at the juncture between the GIR1 ri- bozyme and the I-DirI coding region. . This conformation interferes with the intra- molecular folding that favors the transesterification branching cleavage. 
 thereby  insuring that transcription of the entire twintron occurs before GIR1 acts. . Com- plete transcription of the entire twintron produces the GIR2 ribozyme responsible  for splicing out of the complete intron. 
Once the complete intron is spliced out, a  new folding pattern is favored which disrupts the inhibitory HEG P1 hairpin and  favors GIR1 cleavage activity which cuts and caps the I-DirI transcript. . At this  stage, formation of the HEG P1 hairpin at the 5′ end of the I-DirI is again favored  and may facilitate the release of the transcript from the GIR1 ribozyme. 
While group I introns may help to sort out some of the evolutionary history  and taxonomy of the myxomycetes. .  their introns have also contributed greatly  to our understanding of the biology of introns. . Molecular Approaches to Studying Development in Myxomycetes The complex life cycle of these relatively simple organisms provides distinct  stages where developmental transitions can be studied. . Descriptions of these  stages have been reviewed (Rusch. 
 1980; Sauer. .  1982; Wick and Sauer. 
 1982)  and include the following transitions: myxamoebae to cysts. .  myxamoebae to  flagellated cells. .  myxamoebae to plasmodia. .  plasmodia to spherules (sclerotia). .   and plasmodia to fruiting bodies. 
Gorman and Wilkins (1980) provided a detailed picture of the character- istics that define each of these stages. . For example. 
 plasmodia have closed  mitosis. .  produce mucopolysaccharide slime. .  are pigmented. .  can phagocytize  amoebae. 
 readily undergo somatic fusion. .  move by oscillatory cytoplasmic  streaming. .  and can form spherules (also known as sclerotia). .  or fruiting bod- ies. 
Myxamoebae, on the other hand, have open mitosis, move by pseudopodia,  can become flagellated in the presence of a liquid, can encyst, and can become  plasmodia by mating or selfing (apogamy). . Finer distinctions can also be made. .  For example, plasmodia in a sporulation-competent state can have three differ- ent fates—growth, sporulation, or spherulation—depending on environmental  cues. . A plasmodium that has been starved for a period of time and then re- ceives a brief period of illumination becomes committed to sporulation within  a few hours. 
Myxamoebae, on the other hand, divides vegetatively at low cell  densities but are induced to become competent to mate by substances that ac- cumulate at high cell densities. . A variety of developmental mutants have been  identified to further understand these transitions (Gorman and Wilkins, 1980;  Haugli et al., 1980). 
Pallotta et al. . (1986) was the first to describe cloning of stage specific  cDNAs  from P. . polycephalum myxamoebae, plasmodia, spherules, and spores. 
During  the 1980s and 1990s several working groups created cDNA  libraries from vari- ous stages of P. . polycephalum (summarized in Table 5.1). 
The cDNAs, reversed  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    161 transcribed from RNA at different time points, provided some evidence of dif- ferential gene expression. . Developmental transitions that were once studied a few genes at a time  can now be studied by comparing changes to transcriptomes, the collection  of genes expressed at a certain time point. 
P  polycephalum plasmodia are  considered competent to sporulate after a period of starvation; exposure to  light commits plasmodia to sporulation after an incubation period. . The tran- scriptomes of competent plasmodia and light-induced committed plasmodia  have been compared (Barrantes et al., 2010). 
The transcripts were classified  into three categories (biological processes, molecular function, and cellular  components) using BLAST2GO (Gotz et al., 2008). . Down- and upregulated  genes were identified; cell death–associated transcripts, in particular, were up- regulated. 
A related study carried out the same analysis obtaining RNA from  a single macroplasmodium at the two developmental stages; the study was  in good agreement with the previous study using batches of cells  (Barrantes  et al.. .  2012)  TABLE 5.1 Stage Specific cDNA Libraries RNA source(s) References Myxamoebae, plasmodia, spherules, spores Pallota et al. . (1986a) Myxamoebae, plasmodia Pallota et al. . (1986b) Sporulation, spherulation Schreckenbach and Werenskiold (1986) Myxamoebae, plasmodia Sweeney et al. . (1987) Sporulation Martel et al. . (1988) Myxamoebal–plasmodial transition Bailey et al. 
(1999) Sporulation Kroneder et al. . (1999) Bailey, J., Cook, L.J., Kilmer-Barber, R., Swanson, E., Solnica-Krezel, L., Lohman, K., Dove, W.F.,  Dee, J., Anderson, R.W., 1999. 
Identification of three genes expressed primarily during development  in Physarum polycephalum. . Arch  Microbiol  172, 364–376. . Kroneder, R., Cashmore, A.R., Marwan, W., 1999. 
Phytochrome-induced expression of lig1,  a homologue of the fission yeast cell-cycle checkpoint gene hus1, is associated with the  developmental switch in Physarum polycephalum plasmodia. . Curr  Genet  36, 86–93  Martel, R., Tessier, A., Pallota, D., Lemieuz, G. . 1988 Selective gene expression during sporulation of  Physarum polycephalum. . J  Bacteriol  170, 4784–4790. . Pallotta, D., Bernier, F., Hamelin, M., Martel, R., Lemieux, G., 1986a. 
cDNA Cloning of Physarum  polycephalum stage specific mRNAs. . In: Dove, W.F., Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli, F., Wohlfarth- Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology of Physarum polycephalum. 
Plenum Press, New  York, pp. . 315–327  Pallotta, D., Laroche, A., Tessier, A., Shinnick, T., Lemieux, G., 1986b. 
Molecular cloning of stage  specific mRNAs from amoebae and Plasmodia of Physarum polycephalum. . Biochem  Cell Biol  64,  1294–1302. . Schreckenbach, T., Werenskiod, A.-K., 1986. 
Gene expression during plasmodial differentiation. . In:  Dove, W.F., Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli, F., Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology  of Physarum polycephalum. 
Plenum Press, New York, pp. . 131–150  Sweeney, G.E., Watts, D.I., Turnock, G., 1987. . Differential gene expression during the amoebal- plasmoidal transition. 
Nucl  Acids Res  15, 933–945. . 162     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The transcriptome studies with competent and committed plasmodia build  upon earlier studies where various sporulation mutants were characterized by  demonstrating time-resolved somatic complementation (Marwan. .  2003a  b;  Marwan et al.. .  2005; Sujatha et al.. .  2005)  These experiments exploit the  ability of plasmodia to fuse somatically. . For example. 
 a pho-1 mutant plas- modium that cannot be induced by light to sporulate. .  can be fused with a  fruiting body morphogenesis mutant vac-1 that has been induced by light. 
  in combination. .  complementation occurs and normal sporulation results  (Marwan. .  2003b)  The expression of sporulation important genes identified in these tran- scriptome studies was also later found to be a reliable predictor of sporulation  among individual plasmodia (Hoffmann et al.. .  2012)  In addition, the expres- sion of these genes was found to be altered in sporulation mutants (Rätzel  et al., 2013). . When plasmodia of sporulation mutants were fused and followed  over time. 
 the expression levels of the sporulation marker genes synchronized  and determined the developmental fate in an all-or-nothing response  (Walter  et al.. .  2013)  A detailed study of correlated gene expression patterns suggests  alternative programming of differentiation (Rätzel and Marwan, 2015). 
These  studies take full advantage of the biology of P. . polycephalum as a model   developmental system; nearly genetically identical somatic cells can be so- matically fused. .  the multinucleate plasmodial cells are large and synchronize  rapidly. .  a plasmodium can be subdivided for different treatments. 
 or subcul- tured to  follow a time course of development. . Another advantage of working  with P. 
polycephalum is that it is holocarpic, meaning the entire cell mass is  converted into spores. . This is in contrast to most organisms where germ cells  are produced within somatic tissue. 
Transfection of Physarum polycephalum and RNAi First attempts to introduce foreign DNA into P. . polycephalum were reported  by Haugli and Johansen (1985). 
They chose yeast and mammalian vectors with  the kanamycin resistance gene, which confers resistance to G418 (an antibiotic  to which P. . polycephalum is sensitive). 
They added the origin of replication  from the P. . polycephalum rDNA minichromosomes to the vectors (Ferris and  Vogt, 1982). . Myxamoebal cells were treated with either CaCl2 or polyethylene  glycol (PEG) prior to treatment with plasmid DNA. . Although the frequency of  transformants was low, four out of six strains tested retained resistance to G418  in the absence of selection. . McCurrach et al. . (1988) achieved transient chloramphenicol transferase  (cat) expression by either electroporation or CaCl2 treatment of P. 
polyceph- alum myxamoebae. . The cat gene was placed downstream of a putative promot- er from the long terminal repeat (LTR) element in the P. . polycephalum genome. 
 This plasmid also included the origin of replication from the P. . polycephalum  rDNA minichromosome. 
Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    163 To identify other P. . polycephalum genomic sequences with promoter func- tion. 
 yeast/bacterial shuttle vectors were constructed with either a 5′ truncated  or intact hygromycin resistance (hph) gene inserted into the vector multiple  cloning site (Burland et al.. .  1991)  P  polycephalum genomic DNA fragments  (1–5 kb in size) were then inserted upstream of the hygromycin insert to capture  promoter sequences that were tested by transfection of the constructs into yeast  cells followed by hygromycin selection. . In addition, a 1.1 kb fragment was  fused upstream of the truncated hygromycin gene, which contained the region  upstream of the P. 
polycephalum ardC actin gene along with the first eight co- dons of the ardC gene. . This sequence was named PardC, promoter of the ardC  gene. . One of the constructs with a randomly selected P. 
polycephalum fragment  conferred resistance to hygromycin in fission yeast, but it functioned poorly as  a promoter in budding yeast. . In contrast, the PardC-hph construct conferred  resistance in both yeast types, suggesting that this was a strong promoter in  a variety of hosts. 
Pierron et al. . (1999) later showed that the PardC sequence  functions as an origin of replication, as well as a promoter. . A series of experiments by Burland et al. . used electroporation and the PardC  promoter to improve transfection methods for P. 
polycephalum myxamoebae. .  The chloramphenicol transferase (cat) gene could be transiently expressed in  P. . polycephalum when a construct containing the PardC promoter, the cat gene,  and TardC (the terminator of the ardC gene) was electroporated into myxamoe- bae (Burland et al., 1992). . Stably resistant P. 
polycephalum transformants could  be isolated when myxamoebae were transfected with a PardC-hph-TardC con- struct (Burland et al., 1993a). . A PardC-luciferase construct was used to test  the effect of adding a putative P. . polycephalum origin of replication (AC1-A,  Accession number X74751) to the vector (Bailey et al., 1994). 
Although the  1.2 kb AC1-A fragment did not increase the persistence of luciferase activ- ity over time, it greatly increased, nine-fold, the peak luciferase activity. . This  enhancer-like activity could be attributed to a 760-bp sequence within the larger  fragment. . Characteristic of enhancers, the effect of the AC1-A fragment was  seen regardless of its orientation on the vector. 
Homologous gene replacement in P. . polycephalum has been demonstrated  using a construct with a deleted ardD actin gene, ardD∆1, and the PardC driven  hph gene (Burland and Pallotta, 1995). . Only constructs with the PardC-hph  gene downstream of the ardD∆1 gene produced transformants. . Constructs with  the PardC-hph gene inserted into the ardD∆1 gene did not produce transfor- mants. . Since the ardD gene is not expressed in myxamoebae, expression of  PardC-hph might have been reduced when embedded in ardD∆1 sequence. . The  optimized parameters for myxamoebal cell pre-treatment and electroporation  established by these studies have been reviewed (Burland and Bailey, 1995). 
 Liu et al. . (2009) electroporated P. 
polycephalum plasmodia to achieve transient  expression from genes in a PardC-gene-TardC cassette. . Despite these advances, transfection of genes into myxomycetes is not  routine. . Another approach to studying gene function has been to use RNA  164     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology interference (RNAi) to knockdown gene expression. . Materna and Marwan  (2005) were the first to demonstrate the effect of antisense RNA on gene ex- pression in P. . polycephalum. 
They prepared vectors with enhanced yellow fluo- rescent protein (EYFP) in sense and antisense orientation driven by the PardC  promoter. . When flagellate cells were transfected with both sense and antisense  vectors, the EYFP expression levels were similar to untreated cells (no DNA  added). . Thus the antisense construct completely canceled the expression seen  when only the sense EYFP vector was present. 
A 90% decrease in gene expression was seen when dsRNA or siRNA,  based on the P. . polycephalum polymalatase gene, were injected into plasmo- dia (Haindl and Holler, 2005). . The suppression of the polymalatase mRNA  lasted for 144 h, after which time expression began to recover. . However, re- peated injections maintained the same level of suppression with no sign of  resistance to suppression. 
Expression of the mRNA for the spherulin 3b gene  of P. . polycephalum was decreased to 1% when dsRNA, based on the spheru- lin 3b gene, was injected into plasmodia (Pinchai et al., 2006). . Suppression of  the spherulin 3b gene also resulted in a decrease of polymalic acid (PMLA) in  plasmodia to 12% of untreated cell levels, demonstrating a regulatory role for  the spherulin 3b gene. 
Attempts to use siRNA in P. . polycephalum plasmodia  to suppress mitochondrial DNA packaging proteins Glom and Glom2 failed. .   however   injected morpholino antisense oligomers effectively and reversibly  suppressed these genes in plasmodia (Itoh et al.. 
 2011)  The First Complete Myxomycete Genome Early attempts to clone genomic DNA were frustrated by the instability of high- ly repetitive DNA sequences (Nader, 1986). . The high number of repeats and  intron insertion sites again presented a challenge recently during the assembly  of the P. . polycephalum genome (Schaap et al., 2016), the first complete myxo- mycete genome. . Lacking a reference genome, the assembly was assisted by  reference to transcriptome data, which verified the transcription of ORFs and  supplied information on splice junctures and splicing variants. . Comparative analysis of genome data and transcriptomes in the Amoebozoa  (Adl et al.. 
 2005) and beyond. .  have identified genes ancestral to the Amoebozoa  and Metazoa. .  genes specific to the Amoebozoa. .  genes specific to certain clades  within the Amoebozoa. 
 as well as the clade-specific loss of certain pathways. .   and evidence for lateral gene transfers (Glöckner et al.. 
 2008   2016; Watkins  and Gray. .  2008)  The advent of the first complete myxomycete genome (Schaap et al.. .  2016)    available transcriptomes from various developmental stages. .  and the ability to  disrupt gene function in vivo by RNAi should renew interest in the myxomy- cetes as a model system. 
Preliminary analysis of the P. . polycephalum genome  has already revealed the molecular richness and evolutionary distinctiveness  myxomycetes offer (Schaap et al., 2016). . Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    165 REFERENCES Adl. 
 S M    Simpson   A G B    Farmer   M A    Andersen   R A    Anderson   O R    Barta   J R    Bowser    S S    Brugerolle. .  G U Y    Fensome   R A    Fredericq. 
 S    James   T Y    Karpov   S    Kugrens   P     Krug   J    Lane   C E    Lewis   L A    Lodge   J    Lynn   D H    Mann   D G    McCourt   R M    Men- doza. .  L    Moestrup   O    Mozley-Standridge. 
 S E    Nerad   T A    Shearer   C A    Smirnov   A V     Spiegel   F W    Taylor   M F J R    2005  The new higher level cassification of eukaryotes with  emphasis on the taxonomy of protists. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52 (5), 399–451. .  Aguilar, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Lado, C., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2014. 
Using environmental niche  models to test the “everything is everywhere” hypothesis for Badhamia. . ISME J  8, 737–745. .  Alim, K., Amselem, G., Peaudecerf, F., Brenner, M.P., Pringle, A., 2013. 
Random network peristal- sis in Physarum polycephalum organizes fluid flows across an individual. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci   110, 13306–13311. .  Baba, H., Kolukirik, M., Zümre, M., 2015. 
Differentiation of some Myxomycetes species by ITS  sequences. . Turk  J  Botany 39, 377–382. .  Bailey, J., Benard, M., Burland, T.G., 1994. 
A luciferase expression system for Physarum that facili- tates analysis of regulatory elements. . Curr  Genet  26, 126–131. .  Baldauf, S.L., 1999. 
A search for the origins of animals and fungi: comparing and combining   molecular data. . Am  Nat  154, 178–188. .  Baldauf, S.L., Doolittle, W.F., 1997. 
Origin and evolution of the slime molds (Mycetozoa). . Proc   Natl  Acad  Sci  94, 12007–12012. .  Baldauf, S.L., Palmer, J.D., 1993. 
Animals and fungi are each other’s closest relatives: congruent  evidence from multiple proteins. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 90, 11558–11562. .  Barrantes, I., Glockner, G., Meyer, S., Marwan, W., 2010. 
Transcriptomic changes arising during  light-induced sporulation in Physarum polycephalum. . BMC Genom  11, 115   Barrantes, I., Leipzig, J., Marwan, W., 2012. . A next-generation sequencing approach to study the  transcriptomic changes during the differentiation of Physarum at the single-cell level. . Gene  Reg  Syst  Biol  6, 127–137. .  Barth, D., Krenek, S., Fokin, S.I., Berendonk, T.U., 2006. 
Intraspecific genetic variation in Para- mecium revealed by mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol   53, 20–25. .  Beekman, M., Latty, T., 2015. 
Brainless but multi-headed: decision making by the acellular slime  mould Physarum polycephalum. . J  Mol  Biol  427, 3734–3743. .  Berry, J.A., Franke, R.G., 1973. 
Taxonomic significance of intraspecific isozyme patterns of the  slime mold Fuligo septica produced by disc electrophoresis. . Am  J  Botany 60, 976–986. .  Betterley, D.A., Collins, O.N.R., 1983. 
Reproductive systems, morphology, and genetical diversity  in Didymium iridis (Myxomycetes). . Mycologia 75, 1044–1063. .  Birgisdottir, A.B., Johansen, S., 2005. 
Site-specific reverse splicing of a HEG-containing group I  intron in ribosomal RNA. . Nucl  Acids Res  33, 2042–2051. .  Birnboim, H.C., Doly, J., 1979. 
A rapid alkaline extraction procedure for screening recombinant  plasmid DNA. . Nucl  Acids Res  7, 1513–1523. .  Bradbury, E.M., Inglis, R.J., Matthews, H.R., 1974. 
Control of cell division by very lysine rich  histone (F1) phosphorylation. . Nature 247, 257–261. .  Brown, W.M., George, M., Wilson, A.C., 1979. 
Rapid evolution of animal mitochondrial DNA. .  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 76, 1967–1971. .  Bundschuh, R., Altmüller, J., Becker, C., Nürnberg, P., Gott, J.M., 2011. . Complete characteriza- tion of the edited transcriptome of the mitochondrion of Physarum polycephalum using deep  sequencing of RNA. 
Nucl  Acids Res  39, 6044–6055. .  166     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Burland, T.G., Bailey, J., 1995. . Electroporation of Physarum polycephalum. 
In: Nickoloff, J.A. .  (Ed.), Electroporation Protocols for Microorganisms. . Humana Press, Totowa, pp. . 303–320   Burland, T.G., Bailey, J., Adam, L., Mukhopadhyay, M.J., Dove, W.F., Pallotta, D., 1992. 
Transient  expression in Physarum of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene under the control of actin  gene promoters. . Curr  Genet  21, 393–398. .  Burland, T.G., Bailey, J., Pallotta, D., Dove, W.F., 1993a. 
Stable, selectable, integrative DNA trans- formation in Physarum. . Gene 132, 207–212. .  Burland, T.G., Pallotta, D., 1995. 
Homologous gene replacement in Physarum. . Genetics 139,   147–158. .  Burland, T.G., Pallotta, D., Tardif, M.C., Lemieux, G., Dove, W.F., 1991. 
Fission yeast promoter- probe vectors based on hygromycin resistance. . Gene 100, 241–245. .  Burland, T., Solnica-Krezel, L., Bailey, J., Cunningham, D., Dove, W., 1993b. 
Patterns of inheri- tance development and the mitotic cycle in the protist Physarum polycephalum. . Adv  Microb   Physiol  35, 1–69   Carlile, M.J., Dee, J., 1967. . Plasmodial fusion and lethal interaction between strains in a myxomy- cete. . Nature 215, 832–834. .  Carlile, M.J., Gooday, G.W., 1978. 
Cell fusion in myxomycetes and fungi. . In: Poste, G., Nicol- son, G.l. . (Eds.), Membrane Fusion. . Elsevier/Nort-Holland Biomedical Press, Amsterdam, pp. .  219–265   Cavalier-Smith, T., 1993. 
Kingdom protozoa and its 18 phyla. . Microbiol  Rev  57, 953–994. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 1998. 
A revised six-kingdom system of life. . Biol  Rev  Cambridge Philos. 
Soc   73, 203–266. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Early evolution of eukaryote feeding modes, cell structural diversity, and  classification of the protozoan phyla Loukozoa, Sulcozoa, and Choanozoa. . Eur  J  Protist  49,  115–178. 
 Cech, T.R., Bass, B.L., 1986. . Biological catalysis by RNA. . Ann  Rev  Biochem  55, 599–629. .  Chantangsi, C., Lynn, D.H., Brandl, M.T., Cole, J.C., Hetrick, N., Ikonomi, P., 2007. 
Barcoding  ciliates: a comprehensive study of 75 isolates of the genus Tetrahymena. . Int  J  Syst  Evol   Microbiol. 
57, 2412–2425. .  Clark, J., Hakim, R., 1980. 
Aging of plasmodial heterokaryons in Didymium iridis. . Mol  Gen  Gen- et  178, 419–422. .  Clark, J., Lott, T., 1989. 
Age heterokaryon studies in Didymium iridis. . Mycologia 81, 636–638. .  Collins, O.N.R., 1966. 
Plasmodial compatibility in heterothallic and homothallic isolates of   Didymium iridis. . Mycologia 58, 362–372. .  Collins, O.N.R., Betterley, D.A., 1982. 
Didymium iridis in past and future research. . In: Aldrich, H.,  Daniel, J.W. . (Eds.), Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium. 
Academic Press, New York,  pp. . 25–57   Decatur, W.A., Einvik, C., Johansen, S., Vogt, V.M., 1995. . Two group I ribozymes with different  functions in a nuclear rDNA intron. 
EMBO J  14, 4558–4568. .  Ducommun, B., Tollon, Y., Gares, M., Beach, D., Wright, M., 1990. 
Cell cycle regulation of p34cdc2  kinase activity in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Cell Sci  96 (Pt 4), 683–689. .  Dussutour, A., Latty, T., Beekman, M., Simpson, S.J., 2010. 
Amoeboid organism solves complex  nutritional challenges. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 107, 4607–4611. .  El Hage, N., Little, C., Clark, J.D., Stephenson, S.L., 2000. 
Biosystematics of the Didymium squa- mulosum complex. . Mycologia 92, 54–64. .  Evans, K.M., Wortley, A.H., Mann, D.G., 2007. 
An assessment of potential diatom “Barcode”  genes (cox1, rbcl, 18S and ITS rDNA) and their effectiveness in determining relationships in  Sellaphora bacillariophyta. . Protist 158, 349–364. .  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    167 Feng, Y., Klahr, A., Janik, P., Ronikier, A., Hoppe, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2016. 
What  an intron may tell: several sexual biospecies coexist in Meriderma spp. . ( Myxomycetes). . Protist  167, 234–253. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Sex or no sex? Group I introns and independent marker genes reveal  the existence of three sexual but reproductively isolated biospecies in Trichia varia (Myxomy- cetes). . Organ  Div  Evol  15, 631–650. .  Ferris, P.J., Vogt, V.M., 1982. 
Structure of the central spacer region of extrachromosomal  ribosomal  DNA in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Mol  Biol  159, 359–381. .  Fessel, A., Oettmeier, C., Bernitt, E., Gauthier, N.C., Dobereiner, H.G., 2012. . Physarum polyceph- alum percolation as a paradigm for topological phase transitions in transportation networks. 
 Phys  Rev  Lett  109, 078103. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Berney, C., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. 
Higher-order phylogeny of  plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA  gene sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 201–210. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Clissmann, F., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Two-gene  phylogeny of bright-spored myxomycetes (slime moulds, superorder Lucisporidia). . PLoS One  8, e62586. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Chao, E.E., Fukui, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2010a. 
Invalidation of  Hyperamoeba by transferring its species to other genera of Myxogastria. . J  Eukaryot  Micro- biol. 
57, 189–196. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Fukui, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2012. .  18S rDNA phylogeny of Lamproderma and allied genera (Stemonitales, Myxomycetes,   Amoebozoa). 
PLoS One 7, e35359, 9. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Meyer, M., Baldauf, S.L., Pawlowski, J., 2008. 
Evolution of dark-spored  Myxomycetes (slime-molds): molecules versus morphology. . Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol  46,   878–889. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier- Smith, T., Baldauf, S.L., 2010b. 
Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (mycetozoa). .  Protist 161, 55–70. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., 2011. . Genetic structure of two  protist species (Myxogastria, Amoebozoa) suggests asexual reproduction in sexual amoebae. 
 PLoS One 6, e22872. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Weinert, J., Wubet, T., Bonkowski, M., 2016. . Metacommunity analysis of  amoeboid protists in grassland soils. 
Sci  Report 6, 19068. .  Folmer, O., Black, M., Hoeh, W., Lutz, R., Vrijenhoek, R., 1994. 
DNA primers for amplification  of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I from diverse metazoan invertebrates. . Mol   Marine Biol. . Biotechnol. 
3, 294–299. .  Franke, R.G., 1967. 
Preliminary investigation of the double-diffusion technique as a tool in de- termining relationships among some myxomycetes, order Physarales. . Am  J  Botany 54,  1189–1197. .  Franke, R.G., 1973. 
Symposium on the use of electrophoresis in the taxonomy of algae and fun- gi. . V  Electrophoresis and the taxonomy of saprophytic fungi. 
Bull  Torrey Botan. . Club 100,  287–296. .  Franke, R.G., Balek, R.W., Visentin, L.P., 1968. 
Taxonomic significance of isozyme patterns of  some Myxomycetes, order Physarales, produced with starch gel electrophoresis. . Mycologia  60, 31–339. .  Franke, R.G., Berry, J.A., 1972. 
Taxonomic application of isozyme patterns produced with disc  electrophoresis of some ss order Physarales. . Mycologia 64, 830–840. .  168     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Geisen, S., Tveit, A.T., Clark, I.M., Richter, A., Svenning, M.M., Bonkowski, M., Urich, T., 2015. .  Metatranscriptomic census of active protists in soils. 
ISME J  9, 2178–2190. .  Glöckner, G., Golderer, G., Werner-Felmayer, G., Meyer, S., Marwan, W., 2008. 
A first glimpse at  the transcriptome of Physarum polycephalum. . BMC Genom  9, 6   Glöckner, G., Lawal, H.M., Felder, M., Singh, R., Singer, G., Weijer, C.J., Schaap, P., 2016. 
The  multicellularity genes of dictyostelid social amoebas. . Nat  Comm  7, 12085   Goddard, M.R., Burt, A., 1999. . Recurrent invasion and extinction of a selfish gene. . Proc  Natl   Acad  Sci  USA 96, 13880–13885. .  Gorman, J.A., Wilkins, A.S., 1980. . Developmental phases in the life cycle of Physarum and related  Myxomycetes. 
In: Dove, W.F., Rusch, H.P. . (Eds.), Growth and Differentiation in Physarum  polycephalum. . Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp. . 157–202   Gotz, S., Garcia-Gomez, J.M., Terol, J., Williams, T.D., Nagaraj, S.H., Nueda, M.J., Robles, M.,  Talon, M., Dopazo, J., Conesa, A., 2008. . High-throughput functional annotation and data min- ing with the Blast2GO suite. 
Nucl  Acids Res  36, 3420–3435. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of the Myxomycetes. 
The Ronald Press Company,  New York. .  Gubler, U., Wyler, T., Braun, R., 1979. . The gene for the 26 S rRNA in Physarum contains two inser- tions. 
FEBS Lett  100, 347–350. .  Haindl, M., Holler, E., 2005. 
Use of the giant multinucleate plasmodium of Physarum polyceph- alum to study RNA interference in the myxomycete. . Anal  Biochem  342, 194–199. .  Haskins, E.F., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. 
Methods of agar culture of myxomycetes—an   overview. . Revista Mexicana de Micología 27, 1–7. .  Haugen, P., Coucheron, D.H., Ronning, S.B., Haugli, K., Johansen, S., 2003. 
The molecular evolu- tion and structural organization of self-splicing group I introns at position 516 in nuclear SSU  rDNA of myxomycetes. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  50, 283–292. .  Haugen, P., Simon, D.M., Bhattacharya, D., 2005. . The natural history of group I introns. . Trends  Genet. 
21, 111–119. .  Haugli, F.B., Cooke, D., Sudbery, P., 1980. . The genetic approach in the analysis of the biology of  Physarum polycephalum. . In: Dove, W.F., Rusch, H.P. 
(Eds.), Growth and Differntiation in  Physarum polycephalum. . Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp. . 129–156   Haugli, F., Johansen, T., 1985. 
Toward a DNA transformation system for Physarum polycephalum. .  In: Dove, W.F., Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli, F., Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Mo- lecular Biology of Physarum polycephalum. 
Plenum Press, New York, pp. . 337–340   Heather, J.M., Chain, B., 2016. . The sequence of sequencers: the history of sequencing DNA. 
Ge- nomics 107, 1–8. .  Hebert, P.D.N., Cywinska, A., Ball, S.L., deWaard, J.R., 2003. 
Biological identifications through  DNA barcodes. . Proc  Royal Soc  London B 270, 313–321. .  Hedberg, A., Johansen, S.D., 2013. 
Nuclear group I introns in self-splicing and beyond. . Mobile  DNA 4, 17. .  Hoffmann, X.K., Tesmer, J., Souquet, M., Marwan, W., 2012. 
Futile attempts to differentiate pro- vide molecular evidence for individual differences within a population of cells during cellular  reprogramming. . FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett  329, 78–86. .  Holt, C.E., 1980. . The Nuclear Replication Cycle in Physarum polycephalum. 
In: Dove, W.F., Rusch,  H.P. . (Eds.), Growth and Differentiation in Physarum polycephalum. . Princeton  University  Press, Princeton, pp. . 9–63   Hoppe, T., Kutschera, U., 2010. 
In the shadow of Darwin: Anton de Bary’s origin of myxo- mycetology and a molecular phylogeny of the plasmodial slime molds. . Theor  Biosci  129,  15–23. .  Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    169 Hoppe, T., Müller, H., Kutschera, U., 2010. 
A new species of Physarum (Myxomycetes) from a  boreal pine forest in Thuringia (Germany). . Mycotaxon 114, 7–14. .  Hoppe, T., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Characterization of myxomycetes in two different soils by TRFLP  analysis of partial 18S rRNA gene sequences. . Mycosphere 6, 216–227. .  Itoh, K., Izumi, A., Mori, T., Dohmae, N., Yui, R., Maeda-Sano, K., Shirai, Y., Kanaoka, M.M.,  Kuroiwa, T., Higashiyama, T., Sugita, M., Murakami-Murofushi, K., Kawano, S., Sasaki, N.,  2011. 
DNA packaging proteins Glom and Glom2 coordinately organize the mitochondrial nu- cleoid of Physarum polycephalum. . Mitochondrion 11, 575–586. .  Johansen, S., Elde, M., Vader, A., Haugen, P., Haugli, K., Haugli, F., 1997. 
In vivo mobility of  a group I twintron in nuclear ribosomal DNA of the myxomycete Didymium iridis. . Mol    Microbiol. 
24, 737–745. .  Johansen, S., Haugen, P., 2001. 
A new nomenclature of group I introns in ribosomal DNA. . RNA  7, 935–936. .  Johansen, S., Johansen, T., Haugli, F., 1992. . Structure and evolution of myxomycete nuclear group I  introns: a model for horizontal transfer by intron homing. 
Curr  Genet  22, 297–304. .  Johansen, S., Vogt, V.M., 1994. 
An intron in the nuclear ribosomal DNA of Didymium iridis codes  for a group I ribozyme and a novel ribozyme that cooperate in self-splicing. . Cell 76, 725–734. .  Kamono, A., Fukui, M., 2006. 
Rapid PCR-based method for detection and differentiation of Did- ymiaceae and Physaraceae (myxomycetes) in environmental samples. . J  Microbiol  Methods  67, 496–506. .  Kamono, A., Matsumoto, J., Kojima, H., Fukui, M., 2009. 
Characterization of myxomycetes com- munities in soil by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based method. .  Soil Biol Biochem 41, 1324–1330. .  Kessler, D., 1982. 
Plasmodial structure and motility. . In: Aldrich, H., Daniel, J.W. . (Eds.), Cell   Biology of Physarum and Didymium. 
Academic Press, New York, pp. . 145–208   Kircher, M., Kelson, J., 2010. 
High-throughput DNA sequencing concepts and limitations. .   Bioessays 32, 524–536. .  Ko, T.W.K., Stephenson, S.L., Jeewon, R., Lumyong, S., Hyde, K.D., 2009. 
Molecular diversity  of myxomycetes associated with decaying wood and forest floor leaf litter. . Mycologia 100,  592–598. .  Laffler, T.G., Tyson, J.J., 1986. 
The Physarum cell cycle. . In: Dove, W.F., Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli,  F., Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology of Physarum polycephalum. 
 Plenum Press, New York, pp. . 79–109   Latty, T., Beekman, M., 2010. 
Food quality and the risk of light exposure affect patch-choice   decisions in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum. . Ecology 91, 22–27. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Moreno, G., Stephenson, S.L., Mitchell, D.W., Rojas, C., 2014. 
 The genus Alwisia (Myxomycetes) revalidated, with two species new to science. . Mycologia  106, 936–948. .  Lewis, O.L., Zhang, S., Guy, R.D., del Álamo, J.C., 2015. 
Coordination of contractility, adhesion  and flow in migrating Physarum amoebae. . J  Royal Soc  Interf  12, 20141359. .  Li, G.Y., Xing, M., Hu, B., 2004. 
A PSTAIRE CDK-like protein localizes in nuclei and cytoplasm  of Physarum polycephalum and functions in the mitosis. . Cell Res  14, 169–175. .  Liu, S., Cheng, C., Lin, Z., Zhang, J., Li, M., Zhou, Z., Tian, S., Xing, M., 2009. . Transient   expression in microplasmodia of Physarum polycephalum. 
Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao   25, 854–862. .  Liu, W.T., Marsh, T.L., Cheng, H., Forney, L.J., 1997. 
Characterization of microbial diversity by  determining terminal restriction fragment length polymorphisms of genes encoding 16S rRNA. .  Appl  Environ  Microbiol  63, 4516–4522. 
 170     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Liu, Q.S., Yan, S.H., Chen, S.L., 2015. . Further resolving the phylogeny of Myxogastria (slime  molds) based on COI and SSU rRNA genes. . Russ  J  Genet  51, 39–45   Lundblad, E.W., Einvik, C., Ronning, S., Haugli, K., Johansen, S., 2004. 
Twelve Group I introns in  the same pre-rRNA transcript of the myxomycete Fuligo septica: RNA processing and evolu- tion. . Mol  Biol  Evol  21, 1283–1293. .  Martín, M.P., Lado, C., Johansen, S., 2003. 
Primers are designed for amplification and direct   sequencing of ITS region of rDNA from Myxomycetes. . Mycologia 95, 474–479. .  Marwan, W., 2003a. 
Detecting functional interactions in a gene and signaling network by time- resolved somatic complementation analysis. . Bioessays 25, 950–960. .  Marwan, W., 2003b. 
Theory of time-resolved somatic complementation and its use to explore the  sporulation control network in Physarum polycephalum. . Genetics 164, 105–115. .  Marwan, W., Sujatha, A., Starostzik, C., 2005. 
Reconstructing the regulatory network control- ling commitment and sporulation in Physarum polycephalum based on hierarchical Petri Net   modelling and simulation. . J  Theor  Biol  236, 349–365. .  Materna, S.C., Marwan, W., 2005. . Estimating the number of plasmids taken up by a eukaryotic cell  during transfection and evidence that antisense RNA abolishes gene expression in Physarum  polycephalum. 
FEMS Microb. . Lett  243, 29–35. .  McCurrach, K., Glover, L.A., Hardman, N., 1988. 
Transient expression of a chloramphenicol  acetyltransferase gene following transfection of Physarum polycephalum myxamoebae. . Curr   Genet  13, 71–74   Michel, F., Westhof, E., 1990. . Modelling of the three-dimensional architecture of group I catalytic  introns based on comparative sequence analysis. . J  Mol  Biol  216, 585–610. .  Moore, W.S., 1995. 
Inferring phylogenies from mtDNA variation: mitochondrial-gene trees versus  nuclear-gene trees. . Evolution 49, 718–726. .  Muscarella, D.E., Ellison, E.L., Ruoff, B.M., Vogt, V.M., 1990. 
Characterization of I-Ppo, an   intron-encoded endonuclease that mediates homing of a group I intron in the ribosomal DNA  of Physarum polycephalum. . Mol  Cell  Biol  10, 3386–3396. .  Muscarella, D.E., Vogt, V.M., 1989. 
A mobile group I intron in the nuclear rDNA of Physarum  polycephalum. . Cell 56, 443–454. .  Muscarella, D.E., Vogt, V.M., 1993. 
A mobile group I intron from Physarum polycephalum can  insert itself and induce point mutations in the nuclear ribosomal DNA of Saccharomyces cere- visiae. . Mol  Cell  Biol  13, 1023–1033. .  Muyzer, G., De Waal, E.C., Uitterlinden, A.G., 1993. 
Profiling of complex microbial populations by  denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of polymerase chain reaction-amplified genes  coding for 16S rRNA. . Appl  Environ  Microbiol  59, 695–700. .  Nader, W.F., 1986. 
Gene cloning and construction of genomic libraries in Physarum. . In: Dove, W.F.,  Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli, F.B., Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology of  Physarum polycephalum. 
Springer, New York, pp. . 291–300   Nakagaki, T., Kobayashi, R., Nishiura, Y., Ueda, T., 2004. 
Obtaining multiple separate food sourc- es: behavioural intelligence in the Physarum plasmodium. . Proc  Royal Soc  271, 2305–2310. .  Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., Toth, A., 2000a. . Intelligence: maze-solving by an amoeboid organ- ism. 
Nature 407, 470. .  Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., Tóth, Á., 2001. 
Path finding by tube morphogenesis in an amoeboid  organism. . Biophys  Chem  92, 47–52   Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., Ueda, T., 2000b. . Interaction between cell shape and contraction pattern  in the Physarum plasmodium. . Biophys  Chem  84, 195–204. .  Nandipati, S.C., Haugli, K., Coucheron, D.H., Haskins, E.F., Johansen, S.D., 2012. 
Polyphyletic  origin of the genus Physarum (Physarales, Myxomycetes) revealed by nuclear rDNA mini- chromosome analysis and group I intron synapomorphy. . BMC Evol  Biol  12, 1–10   Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    171 Nassonova, E., Smirnov, A., Fahrni, J., Pawlowski, J., 2010. . Barcoding amoebae: comparison of  SSU, ITS and COI genes as tools for molecular identification of naked lobose amoebae. . Protist  161, 102–115. .  Nielsen, H., Johansen, S.D., 2009. 
Group I introns: moving in new directions. . RNA Biol  6,   375–383. .  Nielsen, H., Westhof, E., Johansen, S., 2005. . An mRNA is capped by a 2’, 5’ lariat catalyzed by a  group I-like ribozyme. 
Science 309, 1584–1587. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Okun, M.V., Erastova, D., Shchepin, O.N., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., García-Carva- jal, E., Schnittler, M., 2013a. 
Description, culture and phylogenetic position of a new xerotoler- ant species of Physarum. . Mycologia 105, 1535–1546. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Erastova, D., Okun, M.V., Schepin, O.N., Heinrich, E., 2013b. 
 Diversity of nivicolous myxomycetes of the Teberda State Biosphere Reserve (Northwestern  Caucasus, Russia). . Fungal Divers. 
59, 109–130. .  Nurse, P., 2000. . A long twentieth century of the cell cycle and beyond. . Cell 100, 71–78. .  Otsuka, T., Nomiyama, H., Yoshida, H., Kukita, T., Kuhara, S., Sakaki, Y., 1983. 
Complete nucleo- tide sequence of the 5.8S rRNA gene of Physarum polycephalum: its significance in the gene  evolution. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 80, 3163–3167. .  Pallotta, D., Bernier, F., Hamelin, M., Martel, R., Lemieux, G., 1986. 
cDNA cloning of Physarum  polycephalum stage specific mRNAs. . In: Dove, W.F., Dee, J., Hatano, S., Haugli, F., Wohlfarth- Bottermann, K.E. . (Eds.), The Molecular Biology of Physarum polycephalum. 
Plenum Press,  New York, pp. . 315–327   Pawlowski. 
 J    Audic   S    Adl   S    Bass   D    Belbahri   L    Berney   C    Bowser   S S    Cepicka   I     Decelle   J    Dunthorn   M    Fiore-Donno. .  A M    Gile   G H    Holzmann   M    Jahn   R    Jirků   M     Keeling   P J    Kostka   M    Kudryavtsev. .  A    Lara   E    Lukeš   J    Mann   D G    Mitchell   E A D     Nitsche   F    Romeralo   M    Saunders   G W    Simpson   A G B    Smirnov   A V    Spouge   J L     Stern   R F    Stoeck   T    Zimmermann. .  J    Schindel   D    de Vargas. 
 C    2012  CBOL Protist  Working Group: barcoding eukaryotic richness beyond the animal, plant, and fungal kingdoms. .  PLoS Biol. 
10, e1001419. .  Pierron, G., Pallotta, D., Benard, M., 1999. 
The one-kilobase DNA fragment upstream of the ardC  actin gene of Physarum polycephalum is both a replicator and a promoter. . Mol  Cell  Biol  19,  3506–3514. .  Pinchai, N., Lee, B.S., Holler, E., 2006. 
Stage specific expression of poly(malic acid)-affiliated  genes in the life cycle of Physarum polycephalum. . Spherulin 3b and polymalatase. 
FEBS J   273, 1046–1055. .  Rätzel, V., Ebeling, B., Hoffmann, X.-K., Tesmer, J., Marwan, W., 2013. . Physarum polycephalum  mutants in the photocontrol of sporulation display altered patterns in the correlated expression  of developmentally regulated genes. 
Dev  Growth Differ. . 55, 247–259. .  Rätzel, V., Marwan, W., 2015. 
Gene expression kinetics in individual plasmodial cells reveal alter- native programs of differential regulation during commitment and differentiation. . Dev  Growth  Differ. . 57, 408–420. 
 Raue, H.A., Klootwijk, J., Musters, W., 1988. . Evolutionary conservation of structure and function  of high molecular weight ribosomal RNA. . Prog  Biophys  Mol  Biol  51, 77–129. .  Reid, C.R., MacDonald, H., Mann, R.P., Marshall, J.A., Latty, T., Garnier, S., 2016. . Decision- making without a brain: how an amoeboid organism solves the two-armed bandit. 
J  Royal Soc   Interface 13, 20160030. .  Rusch, H.P., 1980. . Introduction. . In: Dove, W.F., Rusch, H.P. 
(Eds.), Growth and Differentiation in  Physarum polycephalum. . Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp. . 1–8   Rusch, H.P., Sachsenmaier, W., Behrens, K., Gruter, V., 1966. 
Synchronization of mitosis by the  fusion of the plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum. . J  Cell Biol  31, 204–209. 
 172     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Rusk, S.A., Spiegel, F.W., Lee, S.B., 1995. . Design of polymerase chain reaction primers for ampli- fying nuclear ribosomal DNA from slime molds. 
Mycologia 87, 140–143. .  Sauer, H.W., 1982. 
Developmental Biology of Physarum. . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. .  Schaap   P    Barrantes. .  I    Minx   P    Sasaki   N    Anderson   R W    Benard   M    Biggar   K K    Bu- chler. 
 N E    Bundschuh. .  R    Chen   X    Fronick   C    Fulton   L    Golderer   G    Jahn   N    Knoop    V    Landweber. .  L F    Maric   C    Miller   D    Noegel   A A    Peace   R    Pierron   G    Sasaki   T     Schallenberg-Rudinger. .  M    Schleicher. 
 M    Singh   R    Spaller   T    Storey   K B    Suzuki   T     Tomlinson. .  C    Tyson   J J    Warren   W C    Werner   E R    Werner-Felmayer. .  G    Wilson   R K     Winckler. 
 T    Gott   J M    Glockner   G    Marwan   W    2016  The Physarum polycephalum ge- nome reveals extensive use of prokaryotic two-component and metazoan-type tyrosine kinase  signaling. . Genome Biol. . Evol  8, 109–125. .  Schoch, C.L., Seifert, K.A., Huhndorf, S., Robert, V., Spouge, J.L., Levesque, C.A., Chen, W., 2012. 
 Nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region as a universal DNA barcode marker  for Fungi. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 109, 6241–6246. .  Schrauwen, J.A.M., 1979. 
Post-fusion incompatibility in Physarum polycephalum. . Arch  Micro- biol. . 122, 1–7   Schrauwen, J.A.M., 1984. . Cellular interaction in plasmodial slime moulds. 
In: Linskens, H.F., Hes- lop-Harrision, J. . (Eds.), Cellular Interactions. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. . 291–308   Shadwick, L.L., Spiegel, F.W., Shadwick, J.D.L., Brown, M.W., Silberman, J.D., 2009. . Eumyceto- zoa= Amoebozoa?: SSUrDNA phylogeny of protosteloid slime molds and its significance for  the Amoebozoan supergroup. 
PLoS One 4, e6754. .  Silliker, M.E., Liles, J.L., Monroe, J.A., 2002. 
Patterns of mitochondrial inheritance in the myxo- gastrid Didymium iridis. . Mycologia 94, 939–946. .  Solnica-Krezel, L., Burland, T.G., Dove, W.F., 1991. 
Variable pathways for developmental changes  of mitosis and cytokinesis in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Cell Biol  113, 591–604. .  Stephenson, S.L., Feest, A., 2012. 
Ecology of soil eumycetozoans. . Acta Protozool. . 51, 201–208. .  Sujatha, A., Balaji, S., Devi, R., Marwan, W., 2005. 
Isolation of Physarum polycephalum plasmodial  mutants altered in sporulation by chemical mutagenesis of flagellates. . Eur  J  Protisol  41, 19–27   Tero, A., Kobayashi, R., Nakagaki, T., 2006. 
Physarum solver: a biologically inspired method of  road-network navigation. . Physica A 363, 115–119. .  Tero, A., Takagi, S., Saigusa, T., Ito, K., Bebber, D.P., Fricker, M.D., Yumiki, K., Kobayashi,  R., Nakagaki, T., 2010. 
Rules for biologically inspired adaptive network design. . Science 327,  439–442. .  Ueda, T., Kobatake, Y., 1982. 
Chemotaxis in plasmodia of Physarum polycephalum. . In: Aldrich,  H., Daniel, J.W. . (Eds.), Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium. 
Academic Press, New York,  pp. . 111–143   Urich, T., Lanzén, A., Qi, J., Huson, D.H., Schleper, C., Schuster, S.C., Ward, N., 2008. 
Simulta- neous assessment of soil microbial community structure and function through analysis of the  meta-transcriptome. . PLoS One 3, e2527. .  Vader, A., Naess, J., Haugli, K., Haugli, F., Johansen, S., 1994. 
Nucleolar introns from Physarum  flavicomum contain insertion elements that may explain how mobile group I introns gained  their open reading frames. . Nucl  Acids Res  22, 4553–4559. .  Vader, A., Nielsen, H., Johansen, S., 1999. 
In vivo expression of the nucleolar group I intron-en- coded I-dirI homing endonuclease involves the removal of a spliceosomal intron. . EMBO J  18,  1003–1013. .  Walker, L.M., Dewsbury, D.R., Parks, S.S., Winsett, K.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2011. 
The potential  use of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I for barcoding myxomycetes. . In: VII International  Congress on Systematics and Ecology of Myxomycetes, Recife, Brazil, September 11–16, 138. 
Molecular Techniques and Current Research Approaches  Chapter | 5    173 Walker, L., Leontyev, D., Stephenson, S., 2015. . Perichaena longipes, a new myxomycete from the  Neotropics. . Mycologia 107, 1012–1022. .  Walker, L.M., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. 
The species problem in myxomycetes revisited. . Protist 167,  319–338. .  Walochnik, J., Michel, R., Aspöck, H., 2004. 
A molecular biological approach to the phylogenetic  position of the genus Hyperamoeba. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  51, 433–440. .  Walter, P., Hoffmann, X.K., Ebeling, B., Haas, M., Marwan, W., 2013. 
Switch-like reprogramming  of gene expression after fusion of multinucleate plasmodial cells of two Physarum polyceph- alum sporulation mutants. . Biochem  Biophys  Res  Comm  435, 88–93. .  Watkins, R.F., Gray, M.W., 2008. 
Sampling gene diversity across the supergroup Amoebozoa: large  EST data sets from Acanthamoeba castellanii, Hartmannella vermiformis, Physarum poly- cephalum, Hyperamoeba dachnaya and Hyperamoeba sp. . Protist 159, 269–281. .  White, T.J., Bruns, T., Lee, S., Taylor, J., 1990. 
Amplification and direct sequencing of fungal ribo- somal RNA genes for phylogenetics. . PCR Protocol, 315–322. .  Wick, R.J., Sauer, H.W., 1982. 
Developmental biology of slime molds: an overview. . In: Aldrich,  H.C., Daniel, J.W. . (Eds.), Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium. . Academic Press, New  York, pp. . 3–19   Wikmark, O.-G., Haugen, P., Haugli, K., Johansen, S.D., 2007. 
Obligatory group I introns with un- usual features at positions 1949 and 2449 in nuclear LSU rDNA of Didymiaceae myxomycetes. .  Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol  43, 596–604. .  Winsett, K.E., 2010. 
Intraspecific variation in two cosmopolitan myxomycetes, Didymium squamu- losum and Didymium difforme (physarales: Didymiaceae). . Doctoral Thesis, University of Ar- kansas, Fayetteville. . Theses and Dissertations, Paper 202. . Availabe from:http://scholarworks. . uark.edu/etd/202 Winsett, K.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2008. 
Using ITS sequences to assess intraspecific genetic relation- ships among geographically separated collections of the myxomycete Didymium squamulo- sum. . Revista Mexicana de Micología 27, 59–65. .  Winter, M., 2016. 
Comparing the diversity of myxomycetes along a forest disturbance gradient in  Costa Rica using moist chamber cultures and molecular methods. . Master Thesis, Ernst-Moritz- Arndt-University of Greifswald, Germany. . Wolf, R., Sauer, H.W., 1982. 
Time-lapse analysis of mitosis in vivo in macroplasmodia of Phy- sarum polycephalum. . In: Aldrich, H., Daniel, J.W. . (Eds.), Cell Biology of Physarum and Di- dymium. 
Academic Press, New York, pp. . 261–264   Yoshiyama, S., Ishigami, M., Nakamura, A., Kohama, K., 2010. 
Calcium wave for cytoplasmic  streaming of Physarum polycephalum. . Cell Biol  Int  34, 35–40   Zhou, Y., Lu, C., Wu, Q.-J., Wang, Y., Sun, Z.-T., Deng, J.-C., Zhang, Y., 2008. . GISSD: group I  intron sequence and structure database. . Nucl  Acids Res  36, D31–D37. 
 Page left intentionally blank 175 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00006-8 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 6 Physiology and Biochemistry  of Myxomycetes Qi Wang. .  Yu Li   Pu Liu Engineering Research Center of Chinese Ministry of Education for Edible and Medicinal Fungi. 
  Jilin Agricultural University. .  Changchun. .  Jilin   PR China INTRODUCTION As outlined in some detail in Chapter 1 and referred to throughout the other  chapters in this volume. .  the life cycle of myxomycetes involves three morpho- logically distinct stages (Chen et al.. 
 2013; Clark. .  1995; Clark and Collins. .  1976;  Collins. 
 1979; Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968; Liu et al.. 
 2010)  These are the  amoeboflagellate stage (which consists of naked amoebae or flagellated cells),  the plasmodium, and the fruiting body containing spores. . In addition, there are  two resistant stages—the microcyst and the sclerotium—that allow myxomy- cetes to survive under unfavorable environmental conditions. 
The former is de- rived from the amoeboflagellate stage and the latter from the plasmodium. . In  the first portion of this chapter, the physiological aspects of each of these stages  will be considered. 
Since the life cycle of a particular myxomycete begins with  the germination of a spore, the discussion presented herein will begin with this  structure. . Spore Germination In myxomycetes. 
 the time required for spore germination and the percentage of  spores actually germinating varies with the conditions present. .  the age of the  spores. 
 the species involved. .  the particular strain. .  and even with the particular  fruiting body from which the spores were derived. . For most species of myxo- mycetes, the optimal temperature for spore germination is 22–30°C and the  optimal pH is 4.5–7.0 (Smart, 1937). . However, the spores of snowbank (niv- icolous) species can germinate at lower temperatures (Shchepin et al., 2014). .  Oxygen is a requirement for the germination of spores of Fuligo septica  (Nelson and Orlowski. .  1981)   with those kept under anaerobic conditions  failing to germinate until they had been exposed to air. . Smart (1937) studied  176     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology seventy species and varieties of myxomycetes representing all of the types of  fruiting bodies known for this group of organisms. .  in an effort to correlate the  relationship of external factors to spore germination. . His research showed that  there are some factors that affect spore germination in cultures. . These include  such things as the nutritional condition of the medium. .  the hydrogen-ion con- centration of the medium. .  temperature. 
 and the mutual effect of spores sown  in mass as indicated by single spore and multispored cultures. . This supposed  mass effect has been hypothesized to be due to a soluble autocatalytic factor,  but some recent reports indicate that it might not be a real effect (Haskins and  Hinchee, 1992). 
Spore germination is accomplished by one of two methods. . Either the spore  cracks (or splits) open or a minute pore dissolves in the spore wall and the  protoplast emerges. . The method of germination evidently is constant for each  species. 
Lipid bodies appear to provide the primary energy source during germi- nation (Alexopoulos and Mims, 1979). . Gilbert (1928) found that osmosis was  most important in the split type of germination while enzymes were involved in  both types of germination. . The change in split germination in Physarum gyro- sum to spore germination by the addition of cellulose lends some support to his  hypothesis (Koevenig, 1964). . To accelerate spore germination, various wetting agents have been tried. . For  example, Elliott (1948) indicated that germination was induced or improved  by using a solution of bile salts as a wetting agent. . Erbisch (1964) reported  “abundant” germination after 72 h in 75-year-old spores of Hemitrichia clavata  treated with bile salts. . Nutrient extracts from natural substrates. 
 including hu- mus. .  corn   and bean seeds. .  decaying wood. .  fallen pine needles. .  and leaves have  been shown to improve the percentage of spore germination (Shi and Li. 
 2003)   Elliott (1949). .  who worked with 59 species. .  using (presumably herbarium)  specimens of various ages. .  some of them as old as 61 years. 
 induced the spores  of all species but one to germinate by employing sodium taurocholate as a wet- ting agent. . However   since the cultures were not used to produce a complete life  cycle. .  it is highly likely that contamination of herbarium specimens with newer  spores occurred. .  since most recent studies indicate that germination rapidly de- creases with age (Winsett. .  2011)  The percentage of spores germinating and the time required for germination  vary among different families of myxomycetes. . In a comparative study of the  families of myxomycetes with respect to the ability of the spores to germinate  in distilled water. 
 it was found that nearly all members of the Reticulariaceae  showed an excellent percentage of spore germination. . However   in the Phy- saraceae. .  Amaurochaetaceae. 
 Heterodermaceae. .  Trichiaceae. .  and Arcyriaceae. 
  the ability to germinate appears to differ among genera and species. .  but species  in the Tubulinaceae did not germinate. . The average time of spore germination  in the Reticulariaceaes. .  1–6 h   was shorter than for most myxomycetes. .  and  this family as a whole stands far above in terms of the germination ability of  spores. 
Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    177 Amoeboflagellate Cells In the normal course of events. .  both flagellated cells (traditionally referred to as  swarm cells) and naked amoeboid cells (myxamoebae) are formed during the  life cycle of a myxomycete. . It is usually convenient to use the term “amoebo- flagellate cell” to encompass both forms. 
The general characteristics of amoe- boflagellate cells were observed in many species of myxomycetes by Gilbert  (1929) and Smith (1929). . Normally, water plays an important role in the forma- tion of flagellated cells or myxamoebae. . Flagellated cells tend to be associated  with microenvironments in which water is present. . In contrast, myxamoebae  are usually the form associated with dryer conditions. 
In artificial cultures. .  the  flagellated stage may be completely suppressed. .  at least in some species. 
 by ger- minating the spores on a moist agar surface in the absence of free water (Alexo- poulos. .  1960a)  By adding water to a culture or permitting a wet culture to dry  out. 
 a shift from flagellated cells to myxamoebae or the reverse may sometimes  be induced over a long period of time before zygote formation begins. . Flagellated cells withdraw their flagella before dividing, since cell division  apparently occurs only in the myxamoebae stage. . The myxamoebae stage of  Didymium nigripes may be prolonged and plasmodium formation prevent- ed by the addition of 2% glucose or 0.2% brucine to the medium (Kerr and  Sussman. 
 1958)   but zygote formation is not inhibited. .  at least not by glucose  (Therrien. 
 1966)  After a population of myxamoebae reaches a certain cell  density, they become competent to form zygotes (Shipley and Holt, 1982). .  Zygote formation. .  either by sexual fusion of apogamic development (Clark and  Haskins. .  2013)   involves changes in the cell surface of the outer membranes. 
  since zygotes coalesce with other zygotes but engulf genetically identical yet  haploid myxamoebae (Ross. .  1967)  Myxamoebae motility involves lobose pseudopodia, which apparently use  an actinomyosin contractile system similar to that found in the plasmodium  (Taniguchi et al., 1978). . A study of the characteristics of myxamoebae in Hemi- trichia calyculata, H. . clavata, Physarum melleum, Stemonitis flavogenita, and  Physarum globuliferum showed that the structure of myxamoebae affected their  patterns of movement. . The morphology of myxamoebae varies slightly within  these five species. 
 with the primary difference being the presence or absence of  a transparent ectoplasm and the regularity or irregularity of the overall shape  of the cell itself. . Transparent ectoplasm may be responsible for the pattern of  movement of myxomoebae. . It is difficult to form a typical pseudopodium for  myxamoebae with a thick ectoplasm, and such myxamoebae exhibit a gliding  motility with slow speed. . The other movement patterns include flowing motility  and creeping motility (Li et al., 2013). . Amoeboflagellate nutrition occurs via the engulfment of bacteria, other mi- croorganisms and organic matter into food vacuoles. . While a few species have  been grown in axenic culture. 
 on a relatively simple medium of glucose. .  amino  acids. .  vitamins   and hematin (Clark et al.. 
 1990) or a more complex medium  178     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology (Haskins. .  1970)   most species have resisted all attempts to culture them without  a living food organism present. 
Plasmodium The single most distinctive stage of a myxomycete is the assimilative structure,  the plasmodium. . The latter is essentially a naked. .  free-living. .  multinucleate. 
  motile mass of protoplasm which varies in size and in certain morphological de- tails with age. .  the particular type of plasmodium involved. .  the species involved. 
  and to a certain extent with the nature of the substrate upon which it is grow- ing (Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968)  Three different types of plasmodia—proto- plasmodia, aphanoplasmodia, and phaneroplasmodia—are recognized based on  gross morphology (Alexopoulos, 1960b). . When nuclei and nucleoli were extracted and purified and sclerotia were  induced to form from plasmodia of F. . septica, observations under TEM indicate  that the nucleus possesses a central nucleolus with fibrillar centers, dense fibril- lar component, and a granular component. . A large number of grume granules  exist in plasmodia. . The sclerotium, with a double-membrane structure, contains  organelles and lipid drops (Wang et al., 2007). 
Plasmodia can be attracted by food sources. .  such as oats (Nakagaki  et al.. 
 2000)   bacteria (Konijn and Koevenig. .  1971)   and the fruiting bodies  of macrofungi (Emoto. 
 1932; Madelin et al.. .  1975)   which they engulf and  then use to synthetize carbohydrate and protein (Chet et al.. 
 1977; Kincaid  and Mansour. .  1978; Knowles and Carlile. .  1978; McClory and Coote. 
 1985)   However   the plasmodia of most species cannot be grown without a living food  source. .  and only Physarum polycephalum and a few other species have been  grown in axenic culture (Clark et al.. .  1990; Daniel and Rusch. 
 1961)  Surpris- ingly, these species can be grown on a relatively simple medium consisting of  glucose, amino acids, vitamins, and hematin. . The plasmodium of P. 
polyceph- alum can make complex nutritional decisions, despite lacking a coordination  center and consisting of only a single vast multinucleate cell (Chapter 11). . It is  able to grow to contact patches of different nutrient quality in the precise pro- portions necessary to compose an optimal diet. . That such organisms have the  capacity to maintain the balance of carbon- and nitrogen-based nutrients by  selective foraging has considerable implications not only for our understand- ing of nutrient balancing in distributed systems but for the functional ecology  of soils. .  nutrient cycling. .  and carbon sequestration (Dussutour et al.. 
 2010)   This aspect of myxomycetes is covered in detail in another chapter in this  volume. . The rhythmic, reversible streaming of the protoplasm is characteristic of  the plasmodia of most myxomycetes and is a well-known phenomenon. . An  early theory seeking to explain protoplasmic streaming implicated the chang- es in viscosity of myxomyosin when it interacts with ATP (Kamiya, 1959). .  Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    179 Ultrastructural studies have refined this premise by clarifying the structures  and mechanisms involved. 
Myxomyosin, actin, and ATP were demonstrated in  the plasmodium of P. . polycephalum (Ts’o et al., 1956a,b, 1957a,b), and the  reaction of these substances appears to be similar to that of the actomyosin- ATP system in muscle. 
More recent experiments with the phaneroplasmodia of  P. . polycephalum have shown that protoplasmic streaming is caused by a hydrau- lic pressure flow mechanism generated by the contractions of the protoplasm  (Komnick et al., 1973). . This is a function of the assembly and disassembly of  actin-containing cytoplasmic fibrils in the ectoplasm (Hinssen, 1981). . The dif- ferentiation into gel-like ectoplasm and fluid endoplasm depends on the degree  of polymerization of the actin. .  which in turn has been found to be regulated by a  polymerization-inhibiting protein (actin modulating protein). 
Just what mecha- nism directs streaming in aphanoplasmodia and protoplasmodia apparently has  not yet been determined. . Streaming of the protoplasm in the plasmodium is directly related to loco- motion. . When the plasmodium is moving over the substrate. .  the total volume of  protoplasm transported during a given period of time will be somewhat greater  in the general direction of movement than in the reverse (Kamiya. .  1950   1959)   This is obviously a simple but effective method of circulation. 
Polarity of  the plasmodium appears to be closely associated with potassium concentra- tion. .  with a greater concentration prevailing in the anterior as opposed to the  posterior region of a migrating plasmodium (Anderson. .  1962   1964)  During  streaming and migration of the plasmodium, it continually divides and reunites  to form a reticulate structure. . However, unless two different plasmodia are ge- netically identical, they do not fuse to coalesce into a single plasmodium. 
This  ability to recognize self from nonself is controlled by a multigene complex that  determines membrane fusion and the survival of mixed cytoplasm (Clark and  Haskins, 2012). . Turnock et al. 
(1981) identified some 300 types of proteins contained in  plasmodia and the amoeboflagellates of P. . polycephalum, of which approxi- mately three-fourths were present in both stages, but synthesized in different  proportions and at different rates. . The nature of the pigments in myxomycete  plasmodia has attracted the attention of many researchers. .  but beyond the fact  that many of these pigments act as indicators. .  changing color with changes in  pH. 
 little definite knowledge has been obtained. . In nature, pigmentation is af- fected by a number of environmental conditions, but under controlled labora- tory conditions it appears to be a stable factor (Collins, 1979). . However, Collins  et al. . have isolated several color mutants in the laboratory. . It has been both  suggested and denied that the yellow pigments have the properties of anthra- cenes, flavones, pteridines, polypeptides, or polyenes. 
Czeczuga (1980) found  carotenoids in the plasmodia of various species and xanthophylls in F. . septica  plasmodia, as well as in developing fruiting bodies of other species. . Pigments  also have been postulated to be photoreceptors playing an important role in  180     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology the process of sporulation (Daniel and Rusch. 
 1962a; Lieth and Meyer. .  1957;  Wolf. .  1959; Wormington and Weaver. 
 1976)  The presence of various enzymes, vitamins, sterols, and other organic  substances has been detected in the plasmodium of P. . polycephalum. .  and the  production of antibiotics by several other species of myxomycetes has been  reported (Chassain. 
 1980; Considine and Mallette. .  1965; Locquin. .  1948;  Sobels. .  1950; Taylor and Mallette. 
 1978)  The responses of plasmodia to vari- ous external factors. .  such as anaesthetics. .  low and high temperatures. 
 gravity    light   and irradiation have been studied to some extent and considerable knowl- edge has accumulated on this subject. . Rakoczy (1973), working with Physarum  nudum, found that light affected direction of migration, pigment composition,  and sporulation, and inhibited plasmodial growth. . Furthermore, plasmodial age  can influence the direction of migration (with respect to light) and the length  of exposure to light required to induce sporulation. . Chemotaxis (Carlile, 1970;  Madelin et al., 1975), the nutritional state of the plasmodium, and humidity also  affect migration (Hüttermann, 1973a). 
The velocity of vesicles during cytoplasmic streaming has been measured  by counting all of the vesicles passing through a designated window. . During  streaming, the vesicles are distributed in their moving velocities, and the dis- tribution itself varies with time. . The mean velocity of vesicles and its standard  deviation were found to exhibit a linear relationship. .  suggesting a possibility  that vesicles in the cytoplasm would also be involved in the generation of force  (Honda et al.. 
 1990)  The extracellular matrix of the Physarum plasmodium is secreted by the  exocytosis of vesicles that contain a slime precursor. . The nature of this matrix  slime in Physarum is somewhat in dispute, with Simon and Henney (1970)  concluding that it is a glycoprotein whose carbohydrate is galactose, while  McCormick et al. . (1970) identify a polysaccharide consisting of galactose, sul- fate, and traces of rhamose. 
Using an antibody produced in response to bio- chemically purified slime, it is possible to detect the intracellular localization  of the slime vesicles. . Slime vesicles are abundant in the advancing front of  the plasmodium, as confirmed by electron microscopic observation of two dif- ferent cross-sectional angles. 
By screening various reagents. .  it was found that  rhodamine-phosphatidylethanolamine (Rh-PE) binds specifically to slime in  both its intravesicular and extracellular forms. .  as confirmed by immunoelectron  microscopy using an antibody against fluorochrome rhodamine. 
Plasmodia vi- tally stained with Rh-PE exhibit dynamic fluorescent patterns during the course  of locomotion. . The fluorescence is conspicuous at the periphery of the leading  pseudopods and oscillated according to the shuttle streaming that accompanied  the relaxation and contraction of the periphery. . It was most intense in the relax- ation phase when pseudopods extended, and becomes weak in the contraction  phase when pseudopods contract. 
These results suggest that the slime vesicles  carried by cytoplasmic streaming accumulate prior to secretion at the advancing  margin of the plasmodium (Sesaki and Ogihara, 1997). . Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    181 Sporulation In most cases, the sporulation of myxomycetes in nature seems to occur largely  at night (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968). . Sporulation is certainly affected by a  number of factors. 
 including temperature. .  moisture   availability of food. 
 light    plasmodial size. .  and pH   but the initial stimulus that induces this process is still  unknown. 
The plasmodia continue to grow as long as the supply of food is suffi- cient, but when the nourishment is exhausted, they quickly pass into the fruiting  stage (Camp, 1937). . Gray (1939) showed that temperature and pH were inter- related factors in his study of sporulation in P. . polycephalum. . Within certain  limits, the higher the temperature, the lower the pH required for sporulation. 
 Gray (1938, 1941, 1953), using P. . polycephalum as an example, also showed  that light is necessary for sporulation. . An optimal growth age also appears to be  a factor (Daniel and Rusch, 1962a,b; Olive, 1975). . Starvation is essential for sporulation in some species of myxomycetes but  apparently not in all. . For example. 
 ultrastructural studies of certain species in the  family Trichiaceae revealed viable bacteria from the culture medium contained  within food vacuoles in the protoplasm of young fruiting bodies (Mims. .  1969)    the slime coat surrounding the developing fruiting body (Charvat et al.. .  1973)    and within the capillitium (Charvat et al.. 
 1974)  Daniel and Rusch (1962a,b),  working with bacterium-free cultures of P. . polycephalum, found that the condi- tions necessary for sporulation included a medium containing niacin and nia- cinamide or certain substitutes, such as tryptophane. . A dark incubation period of 4 days and a subsequent exposure to light of  wavelengths between 350 and 500 µm are essential for sporulation in P. . poly- cephalum (Daniel and Rusch, 1962a,b). 
Sporulation-competent plasmodia may  also be obtained without illumination. .  by injection of cytoplasm from another  plasmodium that was activated by light. .  or by small amounts of salt solutions  (Gorman and Wilkins. 
 1980)  Starvation in darkness leads to spherule forma- tion (Sauer et al., 1969). . In this study. 
 these authors enumerated the synthesis  of DNA before illumination. .  a continued synthesis of proteins. .  and RNA syn- thesis until 3 h after the end of illumination as essential processes in sporula- tion. 
At that time the plasmodium (of P. . polycephalum) became irreversibly  committed to sporulation. . Mitosis also appears to be a prerequisite for this  transformation. 
METABOLITES OF MYXOMYCETES Myxomycetes are known to produce various metabolites, and the bioactivities  of these metabolites have been subjected to study, especially over the past cou- ple of decades. . Some of those metabolites have been demonstrated to possess  antibacterial, cytotoxic, and antioxidant activities. . A preliminary understanding  of the chemical composition and structure of myxomycete metabolites will be  included in this part of the chapter. .  and the relationships that exist between  182     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology biological activity. .  physiological function. 
 and their specific structure (if any)  will also be described. . Since large amounts of fruiting bodies and plasmodia of myxomycetes or  at least a sufficient quality of sample material required for chemical analysis  and bioactivity tests is often difficult to obtain. .  reports of metabolites and bio- activities from myxomycetes are somewhat limited. 
However   at present almost  100 different compounds. .  primarily alkaloids. .  terpenoids. .  fatty acids. 
 aromatic  compounds. .  amino acids. .  esters   and naphthoquinone have been extracted from  33 species of myxomycetes (Dembitsky et al.. 
 2005; Göttler and Holler. .  2006;  Ishibashi. 
 2007; Jiang et al.. .  2014; Shintani et al.. 
 2009   2010; Steglich. .  1989;  Zhu. 
 2012)  Myxomycetes have been thought to represent a potential source of natural  active products that have unique chemical structures, and studies carried out  to date have proved this to be the case. . However, additional investigations are  still required because the number of species examined thus far is still relatively  small. 
Nevertheless, myxomycetes have a unique life cycle and are expected to  produce many useful metabolites. . Metabolites From Members of the Ceratiomyxales Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa is the major species that has been subjected to study in  the Ceratiomyxales. 
This is not surprising, since it is by far the most commonly  encountered member of this order. . So far, a pyrone pigment (ceratiopyrone) with  aliphatic side chains has been isolated from the plasmodium of C. . fruticulosa  (Fig. 
6 1)  On the pyrone ring structure of this compound. .  there are alicyclic  carbon chains with two double bonds. .  which form a conjugate structure with the  ring. 
 thus making the compound ultraviolet absorbent in the ultraviolet region  of the spectrum. . The light sensitivity of plasmodia was considered to be related  to the presence of this compound (Steglich, 1989). 
Metabolites From Members of the Liceales More than 40 compounds have been isolated from 10 species representing 6  genera of the Liceales. . These are mainly fatty acids, alkaloids, naphthoquinone  pigment derivatives that have related structures, as well as small amounts of  esters and glycoside (Table 6.1). 
In Lycogala, many compounds, including  FIGURE 6.1 Ceratiopyrone isolated from Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. . Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    183 TABLE 6.1 Chemical Constituents From Members of the Liceales  (Buchanan et al.. 
 1996; Fröde et al.. .  1994; Hashimoto et al.. .  1994; Hosoya  et al.. 
 2005; Ippongi et al.. .  2011; Ishikawa et al.. .  2002; Iwata et al.. .  2003;  Kamata et al.. .  2004   2005; Misono et al.. 
 2003a; Nakatani et al.. .  2003; Naoe  et al.. 
 2003; Řezanka and Dvorˇáková. .  2003; Řezanka et al.. 
 2004) Myxomycete Chemical compounds Enteridium lycoperdon Enteridinines A. .  B Lycogala epidendrum Polyacetylene triglycerideslycogarides A–C (Fig. . 6.2) Acyl glyceride D–G Ploypropioniclactone glycoside lycogalinosides A–B  (Fig. 
6 3) 3  4-(Indole-3-2)pyrrole-2. . 5-dicarboxylic acid derivatives Bisindole alkaloid lycogarubin B–C Bisindole alkaloid arcyriaflavin A–B Bisindole alkaloid staurosporinone Bisindole alkaloid lycogaric acid A Bisindole alkaloid lycogarubin C derivant Bisindole alkaloid lycogarubin B derivant Bisindole alkaloid arcyriarubin A Bisindole alkaloid 6-hydroxyl staurosporinone Bisindole alkaloid 5. . 6-dyhydroxyl arcyriaflavin A Tubulifera arachnoidea Tubiferic acid T. . casparyi Bisindole alkaloid arcyriaflavin C Bisindole alkaloid arcyriaflavin B T. 
dimorphotheca TerPene lactone tubiferal A–B Lindbladia tubulina Naphthoquinone pigment lindbladione Naphthoquinone pigment lindbladiapyrone 7-Methoxyl lindbladione 6. . 7-Dimethoxy lindbladione 6. . 7-Dimethoxy dihydro lindbladione Dihydro lindbladione 6-Methoxy dihydro–lindbladione Cribraria intricata Naphthoquinone pigment lindbladione C. 
purpurea Dihydrofuran naphthoquinone Cribrarione A (Fig. . 6 4) C  cancellata Naphthoquinone pigment cribrarione B (Fig. . 6.5) FIGURE 6.2 Polyacetylene triglycerides. 
184     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology cyclohexene. .  octadien   decenal   hexadecatrienal. .  benzene   benzofuran. .  asarone    and ethul citrate. .  have been extracted from the fruiting bodies using the GCMS  method (Fig. . 6.6) (Wang, 2014). 
Indole alkaloids (Fig. . 6.7) were the major  compounds isolated from Lycogala epidendrum. . Two new compounds (6-hy- droxystaurosporinone and 5, and 6-dihydroxyarcyriaflavin A) isolated from L. 
 epidendrum showed cytotoxicity against HeLa. .  Jurkat   and vincristine-resistant  KB/VJ300 cells. .  and 6-hydroxystaurosporinone particularly inhibited protein  tyrosine kinase activity (Hosoya et al.. 
 2005)  Tubiferic acid. .  which is a triterpenoid acid with a side chain containing  2. 
6-dimethyl-4. . 5-dihydroxy-2-hexenoic acid moiety. 
 was isolated from fruiting  bodies of Tubulifera (Tubifera) arachnoidea (Ippongi et al.. .  2011)  Tubiferal A  and B along with triterpenoid lactone were also isolated from T. . dimorphotheca. 
 Tubiferal A exhibited a reversal effect of vincristine (VCR) resistance, but tu- biferal B did not exhibit such an effect (Kamata et al., 2004). . FIGURE 6.3 Polypropionate lactone glycoside (A) and (B). . FIGURE 6.4 Cribrarione (A) and cribrarione (B) (Ishibashi, 2007). . FIGURE 6.5 Naphthoquinone pigments (A) and (B). . Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    185 Enteridinines A and B. .  two deoxysugar esters with the absolute configura- tions of the hydroxyl and methyl groups. .  have been isolated from Enteridi- um lycoperdon. 
The unique structures. .  1  7-dioxaspiro[5.5]undecanes with an  O-b-d-mycarosyl-(1→4)-b-d-olivosyl and an O-b-l-olivomycosyl-(1→4)-b-d- amicetosyl-(1→4)-b-l-digitoxosyl unit. .  were associated with enteridinines A  and B. .  respectively (Řezanka et al.. 
 2004)  Naphthoquinone pigments (Fig. . 6.8) were the primary compounds iso- lated from Lindbladia and Cribraria. . Lindbladione, the common naphthoqui- none pigment, is one of the familiar red pigments found in the Cribrariaceae  (Ishikawa et al., 2002; Misono et al., 2003a). . FIGURE 6.6 GC–MS spectra of petroleum ether extraction from the fruiting bodies of  Lycogala epidendrum. 
FIGURE 6.7 Indole alkaloids (A) and (B). . FIGURE 6.8 Lindbladione (Ishibashi, 2007). 
186     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Metabolites From Members of the Trichiales At present. .  nearly 40 compounds have been isolated from 9 species in 3 genera  of the Trichiales. . These compounds are mainly alkaloids and fatty acids but also  include a small amount of naphthoquinone pigments (Table 6.2). . Analysis of  fatty acid composition has been done for A. 
cinerea, A. . denudata, A. . obovlata    TABLE 6.2 Chemical Constituents From Members of the Trichiales  (Kamata et al.. 
 2005   2006; Nakatani et al.. .  2003; Řezanka. 
 1993;  Steglich. .  1989; Steglich et al.. .  1980; Kopanski et al.. 
 1982   1987) Myxomycete Chemical constituents Arcyria ferruginea Bisindole alkaloid dihydro arcyriarubin C Bisindole alkaloid arcyriarubin C Bisindole alkaloid arcyriaflavin C A. . cinerea Fatty acid Bisindole alkaloid cinereapyrrole A Bisindole alkaloid cinereapyrrole B A. . denudata Fatty acids Bisindole alkaloid arcyriarubin A–C (Fig. . 6.9) Bisindole alkaloid arcyriaflavins A–D (Fig. . 6.9) Pigment arcyroxepins A–B Indole alkaloid arcyriacyanin A Indole alkaloid dihydroarcyriacyanin A Indole alkaloid dihydroarcyrioxocin A Indole alkaloid arcyroxocins A–B Indole alkaloid arcyroxindole A A. 
nutans Fatty acid A. . obvelata Dihydroarcyriacianin A Arcyriaflavin B Arcyroxocin B Hydroarcyriacianin A Trichia favogiena z. . z-5  9-Hexadecadienoicacid 7. . 13-Docosadienoic acid 7. . 15-Docosadienoic acid 5. . 11  14-Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids 5. . 11  14  17-Arachidonic acid (Fig. 
6 10) T  favoginea var. . persimilis Kehokorin A–C T. . varia z,z-5,9-Hexadecadienoicacid 7,13-Docosadienoic acid 7,15-Docosadienoic acid 5,11,14-Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids 5,11,14,17-Arachidonic acid (Fig. . 6 10) T  floriformis 2,3,5-Trimethynaphthoquinone Metatrichia vesparium Arcyriaflavin C Trichione Vesparione Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    187 T. 
favoginea, and T. . varia, and the results obtained are listed in Table 6.2. 
Most  of these species have common fatty acids except for T. . favogiena and T. 
varia,  for which the fatty acids are not found in other species of the same family. . This  suggests a closer genetic relationship between these two species than with the  others. 
The fatty acids listed in Table 6.2 also represent their characteristic com- ponents and could be used as the basis for chemical classification in Trichiales  (Řezanka, 1993). . Indole skeleton structures of the alkaloids isolated in Arcyria  can be considered as characteristic for this genus. 
The lipid soluble compounds obtained from members of the Trichiales have  been separated and analyzed by GC/MS. . The compounds are diverse but spe- cific for each species. .  which reflects the relationships between species and the  presence of their unique compounds and thus would seem to have potential use  in studies of myxomycete taxonomy (Zhu and Wang. 
 2005)  Some bioactive compounds have been isolated from species in the Trichi- ales because of the structure of the bisindole skeleton in these compounds, such  as arcyriaflavin C from A. . ferruginea (Nakatani et al., 2003), arcyroxocin B,  and dihydroarcyriacyanin A from A. 
denudata and A. . obvelata, respectively  (Kamata et al., 2006). 
Metabolites From Members of the Physarales More than 50 compounds have been isolated from 12 species in 4 genera of  the Physarales. . These are fatty acids, sterols, amino acids, esters, quinone pig- ments, and a small amount of glucosides (Table 6.3). 
Most compounds were  isolated only from the Physarales, but about one-fifth of the compounds are  included among the whole assemblage of compounds isolated from myxo- mycetes in general. . Chemical analysis by using GCMS found that esters and  steroids were the major chemical components isolated from seven species in  FIGURE 6.9 Indole alkaloids (A) and (B). . FIGURE 6.10 Fatty acid (A) and (B). 
188     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology TABLE 6.3 Chemical Constituents From Members of the Physarales  (Bullock and Dawson. 
 1976; Casser et al.. .  1987; Comes and Kleinig. .  1973;  Eisenbarth and Steffan. .  2000; Göttler and Holler. 
 2006; Hamana and  Matsuzaki. .  1984; Ishibashi et al.. .  1999   2001; Murakami-Murofushi et al.. .   2002; Korn et al.. 
 1965; Lenfant et al.. .  1970; Misono et al.. 
 2003b  c; Nakatani  et al.. .  2004; Nakatani et al.. 
 2005a  b; Nowak and Steffan. .  1998; Řezanka  et al.. 
 2005; Steglich. .  1989; Shintani et al.. .  2009; Simon and Henney. 
 1970;  Steffan et al.. .  1987; Zhu. 
 2012) Myxomycete Chemical constituent Didymium bahiense Bahiensol Makaluvamine A–B (Fig. . 6 11) D  squamulosum Clionasterol D. 
iridis Makaluvamine I Damirone C Diderma chondrioderma β-Sitosterol Phthalate-(2-)ethyl hexyl ester Fuligo septica Fuligorubin A F. . candida Cycloanthranilylproline 4-Aminobenzoyltryptophan Fuligocandin A Fuligocandin B Fuligoic acid F. . cinerea Fulicineroside Leocarpus fragilis Acyltetramic acids l-Tyrosine Physarum flavicomun Lanosterol Poriferasterol 22-Dihydroporiferasterol Amino acid P. 
polycephalum Oleate Linoleate 11-Eicosenoate 11,14-Eicosadienoate 8,11,14-Eicosatricnoate Arachidonate (Fig. . 6.12) Stigmasterol β-Sitosterol Stigmastanol Campestanol Campesterol Cholesterol Lanosterol (Fig. . 6.13) 24-Methylene dihydrolanosterol Poriferasterol Ergostanol ∆5–Ergostenol Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    189 FIGURE 6.11 Pyrroloiminoquinones (A) and (B). 
FIGURE 6.12 Fatty acid from Physarum polycephalum (A), (B), and (C). . FIGURE 6.13 Stigmasterol campesterol lanosterol (A), (B), and (C). 
Myxomycete Chemical constituent Phospholipase D Cyclic phosphatidic acid (cPA) (Fig. . 6.14) Chrysophysarin A Physarochrome A Physarorubinic acid A–B Polycephalin B–C Amino acid 1,3-Diaminopropane Poly(β-l-malic acid) P. . rigidum Physarigins A–C Amino acid P. . melleum Melleumin A Melleumin B (Figs. . 6.15 and 6.16) TABLE 6.3 Chemical Constituents From Members of the Physarales (cont.) 190     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology the Physaraceae. 
Furan nucleus is a unique compound in F. . septica (Fig. . 6.17)  (Jiang, 2013). 
The main fatty acids are hexadecanoic acid, 9-octadecenoic acid, and  9,12-octadecadienoic acid. . The molecular structure of fatty acids from the  Physarales is closer to that of the true amoebae. .  which supports the conclusion  that myxomycetes are more closely related to protozoans than other organisms  (Korn et al.. 
 1965)  The pigments makaluvamine A–B (Fig. . 6.11), makalu- vamine I, and damirone C were isolated from Didymium bahiense and D. 
iridis,  respectively. . All of these pigments have a pyrrole imino quinone skeleton  structure. . Similar compounds have also been extracted from marine sponges. 
 FIGURE 6.14 Cyclic phosphatidic acid. . FIGURE 6.15 Peptides lactone (A) and (B). . FIGURE 6.16 Melleumin (A) and melleumin (B) (Ishibashi, 2007). 
Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    191 The β-sitosterol with cyclopentane hydrogen phenanthrene skeleton structure  and phthalate-(2-ethyl) hexyl ester of peptide acid esters were isolated from the  fruiting bodies of Diderma chondrioderma (Zhu. .  2012)  A variety of sterols  were isolated from P. . polycephalum and P. 
flavicomun, but 22 dihydro-porous  sterol was isolated only from the latter species. . As such   this compound can  be used as a chemical characteristic to distinguish between these two species  of myxomycetes (Bullock and Dawson. .  1976)   although it should be noted  that these two species are also morphologically rather different. 
An ester com- pound (3-octene acid propyl ester) has been isolated from the plasmodia of F. .  septica  The yellow pigment chrysophysarin A (Eisenbarth and Steffan, 2000)  and physarochrome A (Steffan et al., 1987) have been isolated from the plas- modia of P. . polycephalum, as well as fuligorubin A (Casser et al., 1987) from  F. 
septica  These pigments were related to photoreception and energy conver- sion in the life cycle of these myxomycetes. . While physarigins A–C, three  yellow pigments, were isolated from a cultured myxomycete P. . rigidum, the  chemical structure of which is similar to the yellow pigments mentioned earlier  (Misono et al., 2003b). 
Metabolites From Members of the Stemonitales Hexadecanoic acid, octadecadienoic acid, oleic acid, stigmasterol, and ergosta,  which are mainly lipophilic compounds have been identified from S. . flavo- genita by the GC–MS method (Fig. . 6.18) (Wang, 2014). 
Stigmasterol, a sterol  compound, has been isolated from the fruiting body of S. . splendens (Fig. . 6.19)  (Zhu, 2012). 
FIGURE 6.17 GC–MS spectra of plasmodia petroleum ether extraction of Fuligo septica. . 192     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology RESEARCH METHODS USED IN THE STUDY OF METABOLITES Both the solvent extraction method and the chromatographic separation meth- od are used in investigations of the chemical constituents of the secondary me- tabolites of myxomycetes. . The majority of GC–MS analyses have been used  to analyze the lipid soluble components isolated from fruiting bodies or plas- modia by ligroin (Jiang, 2013; Zhu, 2012). . Although the separation of other  secondary metabolites is relatively complex, chromatographic separation has  proved to be an efficient method. . Based on the solubility of various compo- nents, targeted products can be obtained using the chromatographic separation  method with gradient elution (Řezanka et al., 2005). 
The structures of these  compounds then can be determined by elemental analysis, such as IR spectra,  1 HNMR, 13 CNMR, and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy. . Each mono- meric compound structure can be identified by its unique spectrum (Casser  et al., 1987). 
FIGURE 6.18 GC–MS spectra petroleum ether extraction of fruiting bodies of Stemonitis  flavogenita. . FIGURE 6.19 Sigmasterol. . Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    193 Antibacterial Activity A new bisindole alkaloid (6-hydroxy-9’-methoxystaurosporinone) has been  isolated from field-collected fruiting bodies of Perichaena chrysosperma. .   and this alkaloid was later found to have hedgehog signal inhibitory activity  (Shintani et al.. .  2010)  Crude extracts from F. 
septica had a good inhibi- tion effect on Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis, with inhibition rates  of 68.00 and 59.45%, respectively. . The same extracts had only a minor ef- fect on Salmonella typhimurium and Staphylococcus aureus and no effect on  Pesudomonas pyocyaneum. . Water extracts did not show antibacterial activity  (Jiang, 2013). . Two compounds (lycogalinosides A and B) that were isolated from L. 
epi- dendrum showed growth inhibitory activities against Gram-positive bacteria. .  The compound z,z-5,9 16 carbon diene acid was isolated from Trichia favogina  and T. . varia, but also can be found in marine sponges and sea anemones. 
Some  research has shown that compounds with similar structures have a negative ef- fect on Gram-positive bacteria but this is not the case for Gram-negative bacte- ria (Dembitsky et al., 2005). . A crude extract derived from Cribraria purpurea exhibited biological ac- tivity against B. . subtilis  This antibacterial activity appears to be related to  the presence of the naphthoquinone pigment cribrarione A in myxomycetes  (Naoe et al., 2003). . Bahiensol isolated from a cultured plasmodium of the  myxomycete D. 
bahiense var. . bahiense had an inhibitory effect on B. 
subtilis   Fulicineroside, a glycosidic dibenzofuran metabolite isolated from Fuligo has  demonstrated a high level of activity against Gram-positive bacteria (Řezanka  et al., 2005). . Antitumor Activity Polymailc acid (PMLA), a natural product extracted from P. . polycephalum  (Braud and Vert, 1992; Gasslmaier et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2002), is a promis- ing drug with antitumor activity. . PMLA as a carrier matrix lacks toxicity in  vitro and in vivo, is characterized by nonimmunogenicity, biodegradability, and  versatility for drug loading (Ljubimova et al., 2008a). . With these properties. 
  nanocomposites based on PMLA demonstrated inhibition activities relating to  tumor angiogenesis (Ljubimova et al.. .  2008a) and tumor targeting of human  breast cancer cells (Inoue et al.. .  2011   2012) and human glioma cells (Ding  et al.. .  2010; Ding et al.. .  2013; Lee et al.. .  2006; Ljubimova et al.. .  2008b   2013;  Portilla-Arias et al.. 
 2010)  In addition, methanol extracts from the plasmodia  and sclerotia of F. . septica have been shown to display an inhibitory effect on the  B16 F1 murine melanoma cells (Jiang, 2013). 
Cyclic phosphatidic acid (cPA). .  which was isolated originally from  Physarum polycephalum. .  has a cyclic phosphate at the sn-2 and sn-3 positions of  the glycerol carbons. .  and this is a key structure for its activities. 
This substance  has been reported to have antimitogenic activities on cell cycle regulation. .  actin  194     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology stress fiber formation and rearrangement. 
 cell invasion and metastasis. .  differen- tiation and viability of neuronal cells. .  and mobilization of intracellular calcium  (Murakami-Murofushi et al.. 
 2002)  Two compounds (makaluvamine A and B) were isolated from D. . bahiense  (Ishibashi et al., 2001). 
They have considerable cytotoxic activity on the human  colon carcinoma cell line HCT 116 and displayed inhibition activity on topoi- somerase in vitro (Barrows et al., 1993). . The compounds makaluvamine A and  C have been reported to display inhibition activity on human ovarian cancer  cells (Matsumoto et al., 1999). . Arcyriarubins A–C and arcyriaflavins A–D have been extracted from  A. 
denudata  There are many compounds that have an indolo-2,3-carbazole ring  structure. . Its derivatives display biological activity against Bacillus cereus and  antileukemia activity. 
 inhibition of protein kinase A and C (Pereira et al.. .  1996)    tyrosine kinases. .  and serine kinase activity (Sancelme et al.. 
 1994)  The ana- logues of arcyriaflavin have been tested as anticancer drugs to carry out clini- cal evaluation tests (Sancelme et al., 1994). . Arcyriarubin C was isolated from  Arcyria ferruginea. 
 and the product of its CIS configuration has an inhibitory  activity on Wnt signal transfer. .  which can provide a new way for antitumor  therapy (Nakatani et al.. .  2003)  Fulicineroside, a glycosidic dibenzofuran metabolite from Fuligo, is high- ly active against crown gall tumors (Řezanka et al., 2005). 
Two compounds  (makaluvamine A and C) isolated from D. . bahiense have been demonstrated  to display activity against colon cancer and ovarian cancer in vitro (Barrows  et al., 1993; Matsumoto et al., 1999). . Cytotoxic Activity Two compounds (6-hydroxystaurosporinone and 5,6-dihydroxyarcyriaflavin  A) isolated from fruiting bodies of L. . epidendrum have been shown to dis- play cytotoxicity against Hela cells, vincristine resistant KB/VJ300 cells and  6-hydroxystaurosporinone. . In particular, it can inhibit the activity of protein ty- rosine kinase (Hosoya et al., 2005). . The naphthoquinone pigment derived from  Lindbladia tubulina and its derivatives have toxic effects on mice leukemia cells  P388, and it is considered as an active substance. . The compound 6-methoxy- 2-hydrogenation-lindbladione also showed a great resistance reversal effect  (Misono et al., 2003a). 
The comound arcyriaflavin C isolated from Tubifera  casparyi was toxic to Hela cells (Ishibashi et al., 2001). . Arcyroxocin B has been isolated from fruiting bodies of Arcyria denuda- ta, and dihydroarcyriacyanin A was derived from fruiting bodies of Arcyria  obvelata. . The information provided herein represents the first report of the  characterization of arcyroxocin B and dihydroarcyriacyanin A. . These two com- pounds have been shown to exhibit cytotoxicity against Jurkat cells (Kamata  et al., 2006). 
Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    195 Antioxidant Activity Three methods have been used to measure antioxidant activities of plasmodia  of F. . septica  These are the total reducing capacity and the scavenging abilities  of DPPH and  − O2. . The results showed that methanol extracts from plasmodia  and sclerotia of F. . septica all demonstrated good antioxidant activities (Jiang  et al., 2014). 
RESEARCH METHODS IN THE STUDY OF BIOACTIVITY Research on the bioactivity of myxomycetes is primarily related to antibacte- rial activity, antitumor activity, antioxidant activity, and cytotoxicity. . The main  method used in the study of antimicrobial activity is the filter paper diffusion  method. . The antibacterial activity of methanol and petroleum ether extracts of  myxomycete can be determined by the filter paper diffusion method. 
 the results  indicate whether or not the extracts being evaluated have inhibitory effects (Ji- ang et al.. .  2014)  The MTT cell proliferation assay is the main method used to study the an- ticancer activity of compounds derived from myxomycetes. 
The crude extract  from the plasmodia and sclerotia of F. . septica, when assayed on mouse mela- noma B16F1 value by MTT, showed that it has an inhibitory effect on tumor cell  proliferation (Nakatani et al., 2004). 
Chemical Characteristics The alkaloid with the structure of the skeleton can be obtained in Arcyria and  can be regarded as the characteristic compound of the genus. . The sterol con- tent of two myxomycetes, P. 
polycephalum and P. . flavicomum, has been exam- ined. . The compound 22-dihydrolanosterol was only present in P. . flavicomum,  which means that it can be used to differentiate these two species (Bullock and  Dawson, 1976). . The yellow optically active pigments physarochrome A and chrysophysarin  A have been isolated from microplasmodia of P. 
polycephalum (Eisenbarth and  Steffan, 2000). . Fuligorubin A is responsible for the yellow color of the plasmo- dia of F. . septica  The new pigments physarigins A–C (1–3) have been isolated  from a cultured plasmodium of P. . rigidum, which has a similar chemical struc- ture (Hashimoto et al., 1994). 
Fatty acids of nine different myxomycetes have been analyzed. . In addition  to the common fatty acids. .  polyunsaturated and methylene noninterrupted poly- unsaturated fatty acids. 
 for example those with 5. . 9-and/or 5. . 11-double bonds. 
  were identified by GC–MS of their corresponding oxazolines. . However, these  compounds have been identified in only a single species of myxomycete. . There- fore, their presence offers a new concept in the biosynthesis of these compounds  and chemotaxonomy of myxomycetes (Řezanka, 1993). . 196     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Dienoic acids formed a large portion of the total fatty acids and varied from  31.43% in Physarum sp. 
to 54.09% in Trichia favoginea being represented by  four major isomers of 18:2 and trace isomers of 20:2. . The total amount of polye- noic acids varied widely, from 8.22% in T. 
favogiena to 18.4% in F. . septica, and  were represented only by tri- and tetraenoic acids, with 9, 12, 15–18:3 (varying  from 1.95% to 6.66%) and 5, 8, 11, 14–20:4 (varying from 0.28% to 5.36%)  acids most abundant. . GC–MS has been used in analyzing the liposoluble constituents of fruiting  bodies and plasmodia of D. . chondrioderma along with the fruiting bodies of  Didymium crustaceum, C. 
leucocephalum, and S. . splendens  The same com- pounds were found in both plasmodia and fruiting bodies of the same species,  which demonstrates that the characteristic chemical elements actually existed. .  However   the components from different species were diverse. .  which reflects  the relationships among species and. .  as such   presumably can be used in studies  of the taxonomy of myxomycetes (Li et al.. .  2007; Zhu and Wang. 
 2005)  Trace chemical elements in the fruiting bodies of seven representative spe- cies of myxomycetes belonging to the order Stemonitales have been studied  with the technique of energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis. . The results in- dicated that there are differences in the trace chemical element composition  of the seven species. 
Calcareous granules in the fruiting bodies of members of  the Stemonitales could not be observed under the microscope. . However, the  concentration of the element calcium was consistently high in all seven species  (Chen et al., 2008). . Plasmodia of six species of myxomycetes (P. 
melleum, F. . septica, Physarella  oblonga, D. . megalosporum, D. . squamulosum, and D. 
melanospermum) have  been examined to study the type and relative content of the various chemical  elements. .  using energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) and a consideration of  their morphological characteristics. . The concentrations of chemical elements  in the plasmodium of a particular species appear to be closely related to its  morphological characteristics. 
Eight elements (including carbon. .  oxygen   so- dium   magnesium. 
 phosphorus. .  sulfur   potassium. .  and calcium) were present  in the plasmodia of all six species. 
 but three elements (aluminium. .  silicon   and  chlorine) were detected in only a portion of a given plasmodium. . Moreover, the  relative content of chemical elements was found to be different in each plasmo- dium. . The relative contents of carbon. .  sodium   phosphorus. .  and calcium in each  plasmodium are close for members of a particular family. 
 and those of oxygen. .   sulfur   potassium. 
 and magnesium are similar in plasmodia that share the same  morphological characteristics and have been cultured under the same condition  (Song et al.. .  2014)  When analyzed using EDX technology, both Ca and P were detected in 11  species belonging to the Physaraceae. . From these, 10 species in the Didymiac- eae had Ca, but only 1 species had P. 
As noted earlier in this discussion, explor- ing the differences in chemical elements could have potential significance in  the classification of myxomycetes (Schoknecht, 1975). . Moreover   as a general  Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    197 observation. .  based on chemical composition analysis. .  it is apparent that simi- larities in the physiological and chemical characteristics of myxomycetes cor- respond to their genetic relationships. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Appreciation is extended to Jim Clark for providing some of the information used to develop  the first part of this chapter. . REFERENCES Alexopoulos, C.J., 1960a. 
Morphology and laboratory cultivation of Echinostelium minutum. . Am   J  Bot  47, 37–43   Alexopoulos, C.J., 1960b. . Gross morphology of the plasmodium and its possible significance in the  relationships among the myxomycetes. . Mycologia 52 (1), 1–20. 
 Alexopoulos, C.J., Mims, C.W., 1979. . Introductory Mycology, third ed. 
Wiley, New York, NY. .  Anderson, J.D., 1962. 
Potassium loss during galvanotaxis of slime mold. . J  Gen  Physiol  45,  567–574. .  Anderson, J.D., 1964. 
Regional differences in ion concentration in migrating plasmodia. . In: Allen,  P.J., Kamiya, N. . (Eds.), Primitive Motile Systems in Cell Biology. 
Academic Press, New York,  NY, pp. . 125–136   Barrows, L.R., Radisky, D.C., Copp, B.R., Swaffar, D.S., Kramer, R.A., Wafters, R.L., Ireland,  C.M., 1993. 
Makaluvamines, marine natural products, are active anti-cancer agents and DNA  topo II inhibitors. . Anticancer Drug Des. 
8, 333–347. .  Braud, C., Vert, M., 1992. 
Degradation of poly(p-malic acid)-monitoring of oligomers formation by  aqueous SEC and HPCE. . Polym  Bull  29, 177–183. .  Buchanan, M.S., Hashimoto, T., Asakawa, Y., 1996. 
Acylglycerols from the slime mold, Lycogala  epidendrum. . Phytochemistry 41, 791–794. .  Bullock, E., Dawson, C.J., 1976. 
Sterol content of the myxomycetes Physarum polycephalum and  P. . flavicomum. . J  Lipid Res  17, 565–571. .  Camp, W.G., 1937. 
The fruiting of Physarum polycephalum in relation to nutrition. . Am  J  Bot  24  (5), 300–303. .  Carlile, M.J., 1970. 
Nutrition and chemotaxis in the myxomycete Physarum polycephalum: the ef- fect of carbohydrates on the plasmodium. . J  Gen  Microbiol  63, 221–226. .  Casser, I., Steffan, B., Steglich, W., 1987. 
The chemistry of the plasmodial pigments of the slime  mold Fuligo septica (myxomycetes). . Angew  Chem  Int  Ed  Engl  26, 586–587. .  Charvat, I., Cronshaw, J., Ross, I.K., 1974. 
Development of the capillitiumin Perichaena vermicu- laris, a plasmodial slime mold. . Protoplasma 80, 207–221. .  Charvat, I., Ross, I.K., Cronshaw, J., 1973. 
Ultrastructure of the plasmodial slime mold Perichaena  vermicularis. . II  Peridium formation. 
Protoplasma 78, 1–20. .  Chassain, M., 1980. 
Essai sur la place ecologique des myxomycetes. . Doc  Mycol  11, 47–57   Chen, X., Gu, S., Zhu, H., Li, Z., Wang, Q., Li, Y., 2013. 
Life cycle and morphology of Physarum  pusillum (myxomycetes) on agar culture. . Mycoscience 54 (2), 95–99. .  Chen, S.L., Zhong, C.G., Wu, M.Q., Li, Yu, 2008. 
A preliminary analysis of trace chemical elements  in the fruiting bodies of Stemonitales. . J  Fungal Res. 
6 (4), 220–225. .  Chet, I., Naveh, A., Henis, Y., 1977. 
Chemotaxis of Physarum polycephalum towards carbohydrates,  amino acids and nucleotides. . J  Gen  Microbiol  102, 145–148. .  198     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Clark, J., 1995. . Myxomycete reproductive systems: additional information. 
Mycologia 87,  779–786. .  Clark, J., Brown, D., Hu, F.-S., 1990. 
Growth of the myxomycete Stemonitis flavogenita on a de- fined minimum medium. . Mycologia 82, 385–386. .  Clark, J., Collins, R.O., 1976. . Studies on the mating systems of eleven species of myxomycetes. 
 Am  J  Bot  63, 783–789. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2012. 
Plasmodial incompatibility in the myxomycetes: a review. .  Mycosphere 3, 143–155. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2013. 
The nuclear reproductive cycle in the myxomycetes: a review. .  Mycosphere 4, 233–248. .  Collins, O.R., 1979. . Myxomycete biosystematics: some recent developments and future research  opportunities. 
Bot  Rev  45 (2), 145–201. .  Comes, P., Kleinig, H., 1973. 
Phospholipids and phospholipase D in the true slime mold Physarum  polycephalum. . Biochim  Biophys  Acta 316, 13–18. .  Considine, J.M., Mallette, M.F., 1965. 
Production and partial purification of antibiotic materials  formed by Physarum gyrosum. . Appl  Microbiol  13, 464–468. .  Czeczuga, B., 1980. 
Investigations on carotenoids in fungi VII. . Representatives of the myxomycetes  genus. 
Nova Hedwigia 32, 347–352. .  Daniel, J.W., Rusch, H.P., 1961. 
The pure culture of Physarum polycephalum on a partial defined  soluble medium. . J  Gen  Microbiol  25, 47–59   Daniel, J.W., Rusch, H.P., 1962a. 
Method for inducing sporulation of pure cultures of the myxomy- cete Physarum polycephalum. . J  Bacteriol  83, 234–240. .  Daniel, J.W., Rusch, H.P., 1962b. 
Niacin requirement for sporulation of Physarum polycephalum. .  J  Bacteriol  83, 1244–1250. .  Dembitsky, V.M., Tomas, R., Jaroslav, S., Hanus, L.O., 2005. 
Secondary metabolites of slime molds  (myxomycetes). . Phytochemistry 66 (7), 747–769. .  Ding, H., Helguera, G., Rodríguez, J.A., Markman, J., Luria-Pérez, R., Gangalum, P., Portilla-Arias,  J., Inoue, S., Daniels-Wells, T.R., Black, K., Holler, E., Penichet, M.L., Ljubimova, J.Y., 2013. .  Polymalic acid nanobioconjugate for simultaneous immunostimulation and inhibition of tumor  growth in HER2/neu-positive breast cancer. 
J  Control  Release 171 (3), 322–329. .  Ding, H., Inoue, S., Ljubimov, A.V., Patil, R., Portillaarias, J., Hu, J., Konda, B., Wawrowsky, K.A.,  Fujita, M., Karabalin, N., Sasaki, T., Black, K.L., Holler, E., Ljubimova, J.Y., 2010. . Inhibition  of brain tumor growth by intravenous poly(β-l-malic acid) nanobioconjugate with ph-depen- dent drug release. 
Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  107 (42), 18143–18148. .  Dussutour, A., Latty, T., Beekman, M., Simpson, S.J., 2010. 
Amoeboid organism solves complex  nutritional challenges. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 107 (10), 4607–4611. .  Eisenbarth, S., Steffan, B., 2000. . Structure and biosynthesis of chrysophysarin A, a plasmodial pig- ment from the slime mould Physarum polycephalum (myxomycetes). 
Tetrahedron 56, 363–365. .  Elliott, E.W., 1948. 
The swarm-cells of myxomycetes. . J  Wash  Acad  Sci  38 (4), 133–137. .  Elliott, E.W., 1949. 
The swarm cells of myxomycetes. . Mycologia 41, 141–170. .  Emoto, Y., 1932. 
Über die Chemotaxis der Myxomyceten-Plasmodien. . Proc  Imp  Acad  Japan 8,  460–463. .  Erbisch, F.H., 1964. . Myxomycete spore longevity. 
Mich  Bot  3, 120–121. .  Fröde, R., Hinze, C., Josten, I., Schmidt, B., Steffan, B., Steglich, W., 1994. . Isolation and synthesis  of 3,4-bis(indol-3-yl)pyrrole-2,5-dicarboxylic acid derivatives from the slime mould Lycogala  epidendrum. 
Tetrahedron Lett. . 35, 1689–1690. .  Gasslmaier, B., Krell, C.M., Seebach, D., Holler, E., 2000. 
Synthetic substrates and inhibitors of  beta-poly(l-malate)-hydrolase (polymalatase). . Eur  J  Biochem  267 (16), 5101–5105. .  Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    199 Gilbert, F.A., 1928. . A study of the method of spore germination in myxomycetes. 
Am  J  Bot  15  (6), 345–352. .  Gilbert, F.A., 1929. . Spore germination in the myxomycetes: a comparative study of spore germina- tion by families. 
Am  J  Bot  16, 421–432. .  Gorman, J.A., Wilkins, A.S., 1980. . Developmental phases in the life cycle of Physarum and related  myxomycetes. 
In: Dove, W.F., Rusch, H.P. . (Eds.), Growth and Differentiation in Physarum  polycephalum. . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. . 157–202   Göttler, T., Holler, E., 2006. 
Screening for beta-poly(l-malate) binding proteins by affinity chroma- tography. . Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun  341 (4), 1119–1127. .  Gray, W.D., 1938. 
The effect of light on the fruiting of myxomycetes. . Am  J  Bot  25, 511–522. .  Gray, W.D., 1939. 
The relation of pH and temperature to the fruiting of Physarum polycephalum. .  Am  J  Bot  26, 709–714. .  Gray, W.D., 1941. . Some effects of the heterochromatic ultra-violet radiation on myxomycete plas- modia. 
Am  J  Bot  28, 212–216. .  Gray, W.D., 1953. 
Further studies on the fruiting of Physarum polycephalum. . Mycologia 45, 817–824. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of the Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press, New York, NY. .  Hamana, K., Matsuzaki, S., 1984. 
Unusual polyamines in slime molds Physarum polycephalum and  Dictyostelium discoideum. . J  Biochem  95 (4), 1105–1110. .  Hashimoto, T., Akazawa, A., Tori, M., Kan, Y., Kusumi, T., Takahashi, H., Asakawa, Y., 1994. 
Three  novel polyacetylene triglycerides, lycogarides A-C, from the myxomycetes Lycogala epiden- drum. . Chem  Pharm  Bull  42, 1531–1533. .  Haskins, E.F., 1970. . Axenic culture of myxamoebae of the myxomycete Echinostelium minutum. 
 Can  J  Bot  48, 663–664. .  Haskins, E.F., Hinchee, A.A., 1992. . Spore germination in Echinostelium minutum. . Mycologia 84,  916–920. .  Hinssen, H., 1981. 
An actin-modulating protein from Physarum polycephalum.2. . Calcium-depen- dence and other properties. . Eur  J  Cell Biol  23, 234–240. .  Honda, H., Sakuma, T., Saeki, N., Takamatsu, K., Matsuno, K., 1990. 
Movement of vesicles in  cytoplasmic streaming in plasmodium. . Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun  172 (3), 1236–1238. .  Hosoya, T., Yamamoto, Y., Uehara, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2005. 
New cy- totoxic bisindole alkaloids with protein tyrosine kianse inhibitory activity from a myxomycete  Lycogala epidendrum. . Bioorg  Med  Chem  Lett  15 (11), 2776–2780. .  Hüttermann, A., 1973a. . Physarum polycephalum object of research in cell biology. 
Ber  Dtsch  Bot   Ges  86, 1–4   Inoue   S    Ding   H    Portilla-Arias. .  J    Hu   J    Konda   B    Fujita   M    Espinoza   A    Suhane   S    Riley    M    Gates   M    Patil   R    Penichet   M L    Ljubimov   A V    Black   K L    Holler   E    Ljubimova. 
  J Y    2011  Polymalic acid-based nanobiopolymer provides efficient systemic breast cancer  treatment by inhibiting both HER2/neu receptor synthesis and activity. . Cancer Res. 
71 (4),  1454–1464. .  Inoue, S., Patil, R., Portilla-Arias, J., Ding, H., Konda, B., Espinoza, A., Mongayt, D., Markman,  J.L., Elramsisy, A., Phillips, H.W., Black, K.L., Holler, E., Ljubimova, J.Y., 2012. 
Nanobio- polymer for direct targeting and inhibition of EGFR expression in triple negative breast cancer. .  PLoS One 7 (2), 1211–1227. .  Ippongi, Y., Ohtsuki, T., Toume, K., Arai, M.A., Yamamoto, Y., Ishibashi, M., 2011. 
Tubiferic acid,  a new 9,10-secocycloartane triterpenoid acid isolated from the myxomycete Tubulifera arach- noidea. . Chem  Pharm  Bull  59 (2), 279–281. .  Ishibashi, M., 2007. . Study on myxomycetes as a new source of bioactive natural products. 
Yakugaku  Zasshi 127 (9), 1369–1381. .  200     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Ishibashi, M., Iwasaki, T., Imai, S., Sakamoto, S., Yamaguchi, K., Ito, A., 2001. . Laboratory culture  of the myxomycetes: formation of fruiting bodies of Didymium bahiense and its plasmodial  production of makaluvamine A. 
J  Nat  Prod  64, 108–110. .  Ishibashi, M., Mitamura, M., Ito, A., 1999. . Laboratory culture of the myxomycete: Didymium squa- mulosum and its production of lionasterol. 
Nat  Med  53 (6), 316–318. .  Ishikawa, Y., Ishibashi, M., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., 2002. 
Lindbladione and re- lated naphthoquinone pigments from a myxomycete Lindbladia tubulina. . Chem  Pharm  Bull   50, 1126–1127. .  Iwata, D., Ishibashi, M., Yamamoto, Y., 2003. 
Cribrarione B, a new napthoquinone pigment from  the Myxomycete Cribraria cancellata. . J  Nat  Prod  66, 1611–1612. .  Jiang, N., 2013. 
Study on chemical ingredients and activities of major representative species of  physarale myxomycetes. . Jilin Agricultural University. . (In Chinese). . Jiang, N., Liu, Y., Zhu, Y.Y., Wang, Q., 2014. 
Study on antibacterial activity of plasmodium and  sclerotium from Fuligo septica. . J  Fungal Res. 
12 (3), 160–163, (In Chinese). .  Kamata, K., Kiyota, M., Naoe, A., Nakatani, S., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Yamo- ri, T., Ishibashi, M., 2005. 
New bisindole alkaloids isolated from myxomycete Arcyria cinerea  and Lycogala epidendrum. . Chem  Pharm  Bull  53 (5), 594–597. .  Kamata, K., Onuki, H., Hirota, H., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Sato, M., Ishibashi,  M., 2004. . Tubiferal A, a backbone-rearranged triterpenoid lactone isolated from the myxomy- cete Tubifera dimorphotheca, possessing reversal of drug resistance activity. 
Tetrahedron 60,  9835–9839. .  Kamata, K., Suetsugu, T., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2006. 
Bisin- dole alkaloids from myxomycetes Arcyria denudata and Arcyria obvelata. . J  Nat  Prod  69 (8),  1252–1254. .  Kamiya, N., 1950. 
The protoplasmic flow in the myxomycete plasmodiumas revealed by a volumet- ric analysis. . Protoplasma 39, 344–357. .  Kamiya, N., 1959. 
Protoplasmic streaming. . Protoplasmatologia 8 (3a), 199. .  Kerr, N.S., Sussman, M., 1958. 
Clonal development of the true slime mould Didymium nigripes. .  J  Gen  Microbiol  19, 173–177. .  Kincaid, R.L., Mansour, E., 1978. 
Chemotaxis toward carbohydrates and amino acids in Physarum  polycephalum. . Exp  Cell Res  116, 377–385. .  Knowles, D.J.C., Carlile, M.J., 1978. 
The chemotactic response of plasmodia of the myxomycete  Physarum polycephalum to sugars and related compounds. . J  Gen  Microbiol  108, 17–25. .  Koevenig, J.L., 1964. 
Studies on life cycle of Physarum gyrosum and other myxomycetes. . Myco- logia 56 (2), 170–184. .  Komnick, H., Stockem, W., Wohlfarth-Botterman, K.E., 1973. 
Cell motility: mechanisms in proto- plasmic streaming and amoeboid movement. . Int  Rev  Cytol  34, 169–249. .  Konijn, T.M., Koevenig, J.L., 1971. 
Chemotaxis in myxomycetes or true slime molds. . Mycologia  63, 901–906. 
 Kopanski, L., Karbach, G., Selbitschka, G., Steglich, W., 1987. . Pilzfarbstoffe, 53. . Vesparion, ein  Naphtho(2,3-b)pyrandion-Derivat aus dem Schleimpilz Metatrichia vesparium (myxomyce- tes). 
Liebigs Ann. . Chem  9, 793–796. .  Kopanski, L., Li, G.R., Besl, H., Steglich, W., 1982. . Pilzpigmente, 41. . Naphthochinon-Farbstoffe  aus den Schleimpilzen Trichia floriformis and Metatrichia vesparium (myxomycetes). 
Liebigs  Ann. . Chem  9, 1722–1729. .  Korn, E.D., Greenbla, C.L., Lees, A.M., 1965. 
Synthesis of unsaturated fatty acid in the slime molds  Physarum polycephalum and the zoo flagellates Leishmania tarentolae, Trypanosoma lewisi,  and Crithidia sp.: a comparative study. . J  Lipid Res  6, 43–50   Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    201 Lee. 
 B S    Fujita   M    Khazenzon. .  N M    Wawrowsky. .  K A    Wachsmann-Hogiu. .  S    Farkas   D L     Black   K L    Ljubimova. 
 J Y    Holler   E    2006  Polycefin, a new prototype of multifunctional  nanoconjugate based on poly(beta-l-malic acid) for drug delivery. . Bioconjug  Chem  17 (2),  317–326. .  Lee, B.S., Vert, M., Holler, E., 2002. . Water-soluble aliphatic polyesters: poly(malic acid)s. 
Doi,  Y., Steinbüchel, A. . (Eds.), Biopolymers: Polyesters I, Vol. . 3a, Wiley VCH, New York, NY,  pp. . 75–103   Lenfant, M., Lecompte, M.F., Farrugia, G., 1970. 
Identification des sterols de Physarum polyceph- alum. . Phytochemistry 9, 2529–2535. .  Li, Y., Li, H.Z., Wang, Q., Chen, S.L., 2007. 
Flora Fungorum Sinicorum Myxomycetes I. . Science  Press, Beijing, (In Chinese). .  Li, C., Wang, X.L., Wang, X.L., Li, Y., 2013. 
Morphology and behavior of myxamoebae of several  myxomycete species. . Mycosystema 32 (5), 913–918, (In Chinese). 
 Lieth, H., Meyer, G.F., 1957. . Über den Bau der Pigmentgranula bei den Myxomyceten. . Naturwis- senschaften 44, 449. .  Liu, P., Wang, Q., Li, Y., 2010. 
Spore-to-spore agar culture of the myxomycete Physarum globu- liferum. . Arch  Microbiol  192 (2), 97–101. 
 Ljubimova, J.Y., Fujita, M., Khazenzon, N.M., Lee, B.S., Wachsmann-Hogiu, S., Farkas, D.L.,  Black, K.L., Holler, E., 2008a. . Nanoconjugate based on polymalic acid for tumor targeting. .  Chem  Biol  Interact  171 (2), 195–203. .  Ljubimova, J.Y., Fujita, M., Ljubimov, A.V., Torchilin, V.P., Black, K.L., Holler, E., 2008b. 
Poly  (malic acid) nanoconjugates containing various antibodies and oligonucleotides for multitarget- ing drug delivery. . Nanomedicine 3 (2), 247–265. .  Ljubimova, J.Y., Portilla-Arias, J., Patil, R., Ding, H., Inoue, S., Markman, J.L., Rekechenetskiy,  A., Konda, B., Gangalum, P.R., Chesnokova, A., Ljubimov, A.V., Black, K.L., Holler, E., 2013. 
 Toxicity and efficacy evaluation of multiple targeted polymalic acid conjugates for triple-nega- tive breast cancer treatment. . J  Drug Target. 
21 (10), 956–967. .  Locquin, M., 1948. 
Culture des Myxomycètes et production de substances antibiotiques par ces  champignons. . C  R  Acad  Sci  227, 149–150. .  Madelin, M.F., Audus, F., Knowles, D., 1975. 
Attraction of plasmodia of the myxomycete,  Badhamia utricularis, by extracts of the basidiomycete, Stereum hirsutum. . J  Gen  Microbiol   89, 229–234. .  Matsumoto, S.S., Haughey, H.M., Schmehl, D.M., Venables, D.A., Ireland, C.M., Holden, J.A.,  Barrows, L.R., 1999. 
Makaluvamines vary in ability to induce dose-dependent DNA cleavage  via topoisomerase II interaction. . Anticancer Drugs 10, 39–45. .  McClory, A., Coote, J.G., 1985. 
The chemotaxtic response of the myxomycete Physarum polyceph- alum to amino acids, cyclic nucleotides and folic acid. . FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett  26, 195–200. .  McCormick, J.J., Blomquist, J.C., Rusch, H.P., 1970. 
Isolation and characterization of an extracel- lular polysaccharide from Physarum polycephalum. . J  Bacteriol  104, 1110–1118. .  Mims, C.W., 1969. 
Capillitial Formation in Arcyria cinerea. . Mycologia 61 (4), 784. .  Misono, Y., Ito, A., Matsumoto, J., Sakamoto, S., Yamaguchi, K., Ishibashi, M., 2003a. . Physarigins  A-C, three new yellow pigments from a cultured myxomycete Physarum rigidum. 
Tetrahedron  Lett. . 44, 4479–4481. .  Misono, Y., Ishibashi, M., Ito, A., 2003b. 
Bahiensol, a new glycerolipid from a cultured myxomy- cete Didymium bahiense var. . bahiense  Chem  Pharm  Bull  51, 612–613. .  Misono, Y., Ishikawa, Y., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2003c. . Di- hydrolindbladiones, three new naphthoquinone pigments from a myxomycete Lindbladia tubu- lina. 
J  Nat  Prod  66, 999–1001. .  202     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Murakami-Murofushi, K., Uchiyama, A., Fujiwara, Y., Kobayashi, T., Kobayashi, S., Mukai, M.,  Murofushi, H., Tigyi, G., 2002. 
Biological functions of a novel lipid mediator, cyclic phospha- tidic acid. . Ann  N  Y  Acad  Sci  905 (1–3), 319–321. .  Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., Tóth, A., 2000. . Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism. 
Nature 407,  470. .  Nakatani, S., Kamata, K., Sato, M., Onuki, H., Hirota, H., Matsumoto, J., Ishibashi, M., 2005a. .  Melleumin A, a novel peptide lactone isolated from the cultured myxomycete Physarum mel- leum. 
Tetrahedron Lett. . 46, 267–271. .  Nakatani, S., Kiyota, M., Matsumoto, J., Ishibashi, M., 2005b. . Pyrroloiminoquinone pigments from  Didymium iridis. . Biochem  Syst  Ecol  33, 323–325. .  Nakatani, S., Naoe, A., Yamamoto, Y., Yamauchi, T., Yamaguchi, N., Ishibashi, M., 2003. 
Isolation  of bisindole alkaloids that inhibit the cell cycle from myxomycetes Arcyria ferruginea and  Tubifera casparyi. . Bioorg  Med  Chem  Lett  13, 2879–2881. .  Nakatani, S., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2004. 
Cycloanthranilyl- proline-derived constituents from a myxomycete Fuligo candida. . Chem  Pharm  Bull  52 (3),  368–370. .  Naoe, A., Ishibashi, M., Yamamoto, Y., 2003. . Cribrarione A, a new antimicrobial Naphthoquinone  pigment from a myxomycete Cribraria purpurea. 
Tetrahedron 59, 3433–3435. .  Nelson, R.K., Orlowski, M., 1981. 
Spore germination and swarm cell morphogenesis in the acel- lular slime mold Fuligo septica. . Arch  Microbiol  130, 189–194. .  Nowak, A., Steffan, B., 1998. 
Polycephalin B and C: unusual tetramic acids from plasmodia of the  slime mold Physarum polycephalum (myxomycetes). . Angew  Chem  Int  Ed  37, 3139–3141. 
 Olive, L.S., 1975. . The Mycetozoans. 
Academic Press, New York. .  Pereira, E.R., Belin, L., Sancelme, M., Prudhomme, M., Ollier, M., 1996. 
Structure-activity re- lationships in a series of substituted indolocarbazoles: topoisomerase I and protein kinase C  inhibition and antitumoral and antimicrobial properties. . J  Med  Chem  39, 4471–4477. .  Portilla-Arias, J., Patil, R., Hu, J., Ding, H., Black, K.L., García-Alvarez, M., Muñoz-Guerra, S.,  Ljubimova, J.Y., Holler, E., 2010. 
Nanoconjugate platforms development based in poly(β,l- malic acid) methyl esters for tumor drug delivery. . J  Nanomater  2010, 8   Rakoczy, L., 1973. . The myxomycete Physarum nudum as a model organism for photobiological  studies. 
Ber  Deut  Bot  Ges  86, 141–164. .  Řezanka, T., 1993. 
Polyunsaturated and unusual fatty acids from slime moulds. . Phytochemistry 33,  1441–1444. .  Řezanka, T., Dvorˇáková, R., 2003. 
Polypropionate lactones of deoxysugars glycosides from slime  mold Lycogala epidendrum. . Phytochemistry 63, 945–952. .  Řezanka, T., Dvorˇáková, R., Hanus, L.O., Dembitsky, V.M., 2004. 
Enteridinines A and B from slime  mold Enteridium lycoperdon. . Phytochemistry 65 (4), 455–462. .  Řezanka, T., Hanus, L.O., Dembitsky, V.M., 2005. 
The fulicineroside, a new unusual glycosidic  dibenzofuran metabolite from the slime mold Fuligo cinerea (L.) Wiggers. . Eur  J  Org  Chem   13, 2708–2714. .  Ross, I.K., 1967. 
Syngamy and plasmodiumformation in the myxomycete Didymium iridis. . Proto- plasma 64, 104–119. .  Sancelme, M., Fabre, S., Prudhomme, M., 1994. 
Antimicrobial activities of indolocarbazole and  bis-indole protein-kinase-C inhibitors. . J  Antibiot  47, 792–798. .  Sauer, H.W., Babcock, K.L., Rusch, H.P., 1969. 
Sporulation in Physarum polycephalum: a model  system for studies on differentiation. . Exp  Cell Res  57 (2), 319–327. .  Schoknecht, J.D., 1975. 
SEM and X-ray microanalysis of calcareous deposits in myxomycete fruc- tifications. . Trans  Am  Microsc  Soc  94, 216–223. 
 Physiology and Biochemistry of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 6    203 Sesaki, H., Ogihara, S., 1997. . Secretion of slime, the extracellular matrix of the plasmodium, as  visualized with a fluorescent probe and its correlation with locomotion on the substratum. 
Cell  Struct. . Funct  22 (2), 279–289. .  Shchepin, O., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2014. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes in agar culture:  some results and open problems. . Protistology 8, 53–61. .  Shi, L.P., Li, Y., 2003. . Studied on influence of nutritional decoctions and pH on spore germination  in the myxomycetes. 
J  Jilin Agric. . Univ  25 (3), 275–277, 281. . (In Chinese). .  Shintani, A., Ohtsuki, T., Yamamoto, Y., Hakamatsuka, T., Kawahara, N., 2009. 
Fuligoic acid, a new  pigment with a chiornated polyene-pyrone acid structure isolated from the myxomycete Fuligo  septica var. . flava  Tetrahedron Lett. 
10, 1016–1017. .  Shintani, A., Toume, K., Rifai, Y., Arai, M.A., Ishibashi, M., 2010. 
A bisindole alkaloid with hedge- hog signal inhibitory activity from the myxomycete Perichaena chrysosperma. . J  Nat  Prod  73  (10), 1711–1713. .  Shipley, G.L., Holt, C.E., 1982. 
Cell fusion competence and its induction in Physarum polyceph- alum and Didymium iridis. . Dev  Biol  90, 110–117. .  Simon, H.L., Henney, H.R., 1970. 
Chemical composition of slime from three species of myxomy- cetes. . FEBS Lett  7, 80–82   Smart, R.F., 1937. . Influence of certain external factors on spore germination in the myxomycetes. 
 Am  J  Bot  24, 145–159. .  Smith, E.C., 1929. . Some phases of spore germination of myxomycetes. 
Am  J  Bot  16 (9), 645–650. .  Sobels, J.C., 1950. . Nutrition de quelques Myxomycètes en cultures pures et associées et leurs  propiétés antibiotiques. 
Koch & Knuttel, Gouda. .  Song, X.X., Wang, Q., Li, Y., 2014. . Chemical element characteristics of six plasmodia in myxomy- cetes. 
J  Northeast Forest. . Univ  42 (1), 112–115, 121. .  Steffan, B., Praemassing, M., Steglich, W., 1987. . Physarochrome A, a plasmodial pigment from  the slime mould Physarum polycephalum (myxomycetes). 
Tetrahedron Lett. . 28, 3667–3670. .  Steglich, W., 1989. . Slime molds (myxomycetes) as a source of new biological active metabolites. 
 Pure Appl. . Chem  61, 281–288. .  Steglich, W., Steffan, B., Kopanski, L., Eckhardt, G., 1980. . Pilzpigmente, 36. 
Indolfarbstoffe aus  Fruchtkörpern des Schleimpilzes Arcyria denudata. . Angew  Chem  Int  Ed  Engl  19, 459–460. .  Taniguchi, M., Yamazaki, K., Ohta, J., 1978. 
Extraction of contractile proteins from myxamoebae  of Physarum polycephalum. . Cell Struct. . Funct  3, 181–190. .  Taylor, R.L., Mallette, M.F., 1978. 
Purification of antibiotics from Physarum gyrosum by high- pressure liquid chromatography. . Prep  Biochem  8, 241–257. .  Therrien, C.D., 1966. . Microspectrophotometric measurement of nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid  content in two myxomycetes. 
Can  J  Bot  44, 1667–1675. .  Ts’o, P.O.P., Bonner, J., Eggman, L., Vinograd, J., 1956a. 
Observations on an ATP-sensitive protein  systemfromthe plasmodia of a myxomycete. . J  Gen  Physiol  39, 325–347. .  Ts’o, P.O.P., Eggman, L., Vinograd, J., 1956b. 
The isolation of myxomyosin, an ATP-sensitive pro- tein from the plasmodium of a myxomycete. . J  Gen  Physiol  39, 801–812. .  Ts’o, P.O.P., Eggman, L., Vinograd, J., 1957a. 
Physical and chemical studies of myxomyosin, an  ATP-sensitive protein in cytoplasm. . Biochim  Biophys  Acta 25, 532–542. .  Ts’o, P.O.P., Eggman, L., Vinograd, J., 1957b. 
The interaction of myxomyosin with ATP. . Arch   Biochem  Biophys  66, 64–70   Turnock, G., Morris, S.R., Dee, J., 1981. . A comparison of the proteins of the amoebal and plas- modial phases of the slime mould, Physarum polycephalum. . Eur  J  Biochem  115, 533–538. .  Wang, W., 2014. 
Research on biological activity and phylogeny from certain myxomycetes of  Trichialeas and Physarales. . Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun. . (In Chinese). 
204     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Wang, X.L., Li, Y.S., Li, Y., 2007. . Ultrastructure of nucleus and sclerotium of Fuligo septica pha- nero plasmodium. . Mycosystema 26 (1), 135–138, (In Chinese). .  Winsett, K.E., 2011. 
Intraspecific variation in response to spore-to-spore cultivation in the myxomy- cete, Didymium squamulosum. . Mycosphere 2, 555–564. .  Wolf, F.T., 1959. . Chemical nature of the photoreceptor pigment inducing fruiting of plasmodia of  Physarum polycephalum. 
In: Withrow, R. . (Ed.), Photoperiodism and Related Phenomena in  Plants and Animals. . American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, DC,  pp. . 321–326, (Publ. . no  55)   Wormington, W.M., Weaver, R.F., 1976. 
Photo receptor pigment that induces differentiation in the  slime mold Physarum polycephalum. . Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA 73, 3896–3899. .  Zhu, H., 2012. 
Studies on ontogeny and chemical constituents of myxomycetes from representa- tive regions in northern China. . Phd dissertation, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun. . (In  Chinese). . Zhu, H., Wang, Q., 2005. 
Study on gel electrophoresis of protein from the species of Trichiales. .  J  Jilin Agric. . Univ  27 (6), 614–616, (In Chinese). 
 205 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00007-X Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 7 Taxonomy and Systematics:  Current Knowledge and  Approaches on the Taxonomic  Treatment of Myxomycetes Carlos Lado*. .  Uno Eliasson** *Royal Botanic Garden (CSIC). 
 Madrid   Spain; **University of Gothenburg. .  Gothenburg. .  Sweden INTRODUCTION The word taxonomy is derived from the Greek τάξιζ taxis. .  “arrangement. . ” and  νοµία nomia. 
 “method  ” and   in general. .  it can be considered as the science that  defines and gives names to the groups of organisms according to their shared  features. . These features may be of different origin—morphological. 
 cellular    molecular. .  structural. .  or genetic—but morphological features have traditionally  been most frequently used. .  due to their easy observation and comparison. 
Taxonomy   as we understand it today. .  begins in the middle of the 18th cen- tury when Linnaeus (1753). .  in his Systema Naturae. 
 proposed the first modern  taxonomic classification of all living organisms based on a binomial nomen- clature system with a generic name followed by a species name identifying the  species. . Since then, taxonomy has become one of the oldest branches of biology  and an essential pillar of biological sciences. . The taxonomy of the myxomycetes is derived from features of their life  cycle, especially from the sexual phase, when they generate the fruiting bodies  that produce the spores. 
The different forms. .  structures. .  dimensions and orna- mentation of the structural elements of the fruiting bodies. 
 such as the hypo- thallus. .  the stipe. .  the peridium. 
 the columella. .  the capillitium and the spores. .   serve as a basis for the taxonomy of the group. 
In the life cycle of myxomyce- tes, spore-producing fruiting bodies alternate with an assimilative motile stage. .  Normally haploid spores grow into amoeboflagellate cells. 
After coalescence of  two cells into a cell with a diploid nucleus. .  repeated mitotic divisions without  wall formation result in a multinucleate cell. 
 the plasmodium. .  surrounded by a  slime sheath that eventually gives rise to fruiting bodies. . The living protoplast is  206     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology motile inside the sheath. .  which is continuously produced at the anterior end and  collapses as an empty sheath at the posterior end. . The characters derived from  these assimilative stages. 
 due to their variability and difficult observation. .  have  not been taken into account in the taxonomy of myxomycetes. 
 but can be a new  source of information. . Myxomycetes have been considered a natural group of organisms and their  taxonomy has remained relatively stable over the years. .  but their relationships  with other organisms have been controversial since they have been treated as  special groups of fungi and as protozoa (Fig. . 7 1)  Due to their small size. 
 most myxomycetes are normally overlooked by  nonspecialists or people not especially searching for them. .  but a few common  species have large and conspicuous plasmodia and fruiting bodies. .  and are well  recognized by mycologists or people interested in nature in general (Fig. 
7 2)  DEFINITION OF TAXONOMY. .  SYSTEMATICS. .    AND NOMENCLATURE Both taxonomy and systematics aim at finding and identifying the living units in  the web of biodiversity and tracing their phylogeny and evolutionary pathways. .  Taxonomy involves adoption of a scientific name of the biological unit, clas- sification, and study of relationships, and (nowadays) finding the taxon’s place  in a phylogenetic system. . The term systematics is often used in a broader sense. .   an overview of the biodiversity and the placing of species and groups along the  branches of an evolutionary tree. 
 but there is no sharp distinction between the  terms taxonomy and systematics. . The species is the fundamental unit and the Holy Grail of systematic biol- ogy. . The species name always consists of two parts, the first name, the generic  name, indicating to which genus the organism belongs, the second name, the  specific epithet, defining the species. 
Subspecific taxa below the species level  may be used where appropriate and needed. . Genera are grouped into catego- ries of higher hierarchical levels, such as families, orders, classes and, finally,  kingdoms, divisions or phyla (singular: phylum). . The system with two words  necessary to define a species is called the binary nomenclatural system and  is internationally well established in biological sciences. . The nomenclature is  concerned with the principles, rules, and recommendations that are used for the  formation and use of these names. . Its rules may occasionally be subjected to mi- nor adjustments decided at international congresses. 
The current International  Code of Nomenclature for algae. .  fungi   and plants (ICN) (McNeill et al.. 
 2012)    the so-called Melbourne Code. .  covers   specifically. 
 myxomycetes (slime molds)  as established in the “Preamble 8.” The myxomycetes have traditionally been  studied by the mycologists since their fruiting bodies resemble those of true  fungi and are reproduced by spores. .  but their closer affinities to the protozoa  have become increasingly evident. . Due to these affinities. 
 some researchers  have applied the rules of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    207 FIGURE 7.1 Various examples of fruiting bodies. . (A) Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa, columnar,  and dendroid fruiting bodies (×24) (23267 Lado). . (B) Ceratiomyxa morchella, morchelloid  fruiting body (×48) (9745 Lado). 
(C) Echinostelium arboreum sporocarp (×144) (2937 dwb). .  (D) Clastoderma debaryanum sporocarp (×72) (23250 Lado). . (E) Cribraria piriformis sporocarp  (×24) (MA-Fungi 35666). 
(F) Lycogala conicum aethalium (×24) (11651 Lado). . (G) Tubifera  microsperma pseudoaethalium (×12) (11865 Lado). . (H) Calomyxa metallica sessile sporocarp  (×48) (20398 Lado). . (I) Arcyria affinis group of sporocarps (×18) (MA-Fungi 65288). . 208     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology FIGURE 7.2 Various other fruiting bodies. 
(A) Trichia agaves group of sessile sporocarp  (×36) (22637 Lado). . (B) Hemitrichia serpula plasmodicoarps (×6) (11608 Lado). . (C) Didymium  operculatum sporocarp (×48) (3142 dwb). . (D) Diderma miniatum sporocarp (×48) (24483 Lado). .   (E) Diderma effusum plasmodicoarps (×24) (11866 Lado). 
(F) Craterium dictyosporum sporocarp (×36)  (1984 Lado). . (G) Lamproderma splendens sporocarp (×36) (20736 Lado). . (H) Comatricha suksdorfii  sporocarp (×36) (19949 Lado). . (I) Stemonitis lignicola group of sporocarps (×6) (20554 Lado). 
Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    209 (ICZN) (Ride, 1999) to naming the hierarchical levels above genera, affecting  the end particles of the names. . The myxomycetes are an example of an ambi- regnal group of organisms, but the ICN is the one that governs its nomenclature  until another agreement is reached and decision taken. 
Although the word “species” is commonly used and well understood, a theo- retical definition is not very easy and the species concept has been defined in  different ways. . A popular definition is that “a species is what a good taxonomist  considers to be a species.” Another definition is “a group of morphologically  and genetically closely related individuals.” But different organisms have dif- ferent life strategies and it may prove difficult or impossible to find a definition  that will cover all groups of organisms. . It may well be that species is a term that  simply cannot be used for some biological systems. . Hence, terms like sibling  species and morphospecies have been created, and sometimes we find it appro- priate to talk about species complexes. 
The name of a new species is always formally attached to a nomenclatural  type material, a carefully selected specimen called the type specimen. . The type  specimen should to the maximum extent possible possess the characteristic  features of the species. 
Nevertheless. .  it represents merely a sample within the  variation range of a species and it is not always the most typical representative  in the expression of every morphological character of a species. . As stated in Art. 
 7.2 in Chapter II, Section 2 in the ICN, the nomenclatural type is not necessar- ily the most typical or representative element of a taxon. . Therefore, study of a  large sample of material is instrumental in establishing limits between species. .  In other words, field studies and collections taken in the field remain important. .  Studies of type material are of course important for the correct application of  names. 
Although the classic species concept has been based on morphological crite- ria in myxomycetes. .  as well as in other organisms. .  other features are also taken  into account in modern taxonomic research (Walker and Stephenson. .  2016)   During the past 2 decades extensive biosystematic studies have been carried  out on several species of myxomycetes, among them Didymium iridis, D. 
squa- mulosum, Arcyria cinerea, Physarum compressum and Badhamia melanospora  [=B. . gracilis] (Clark, 1996; Clark et al., 1999, 2002a,b). 
In summary. .  it could  be said that what is treated in basic monographic works as a species may in  certain cases comprise a mixture of nonheterothallic. .  as well as heterothallic  and apomictic strains. 
 which in turn may comprise sexually incompatible bio- logical species. . The different isolates may differ to a varying degree in mor- phology. . Although all or most of the isolates generally conform to the standard  species description there are often variations from the norm that differ in, for  example, the shape of the sporotheca. . This has been demonstrated, for example,  in B. 
melanospora (Clark et al., 2002a). . Morphological variations may also be  due to environmental factors. 
In Comatricha laxa. .  a considerable variation in  sporotheca shape has been demonstrated within a single biological species and  appears to be due mainly to environmental effects (Clark and Haskins. .  2002)  210     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Nevertheless, the species concept is crucial to biodiversity and to large parts  of biology. . We need morphologically defined species to conduct field studies,  inventories, ecological investigations, and to discuss distribution and dispersal. .  Given the reproductive patterns of myxomycetes, new species should be de- scribed only when morphological characters are pronounced and appear con- stant. . Whenever possible, a potential new species should be cultivated under  laboratory conditions to prove constancy of characters before being described. 
 Unfortunately. .  numerous species have proven difficult to grow under labora- tory conditions (Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta. 
 2008; Shchepin et al.. .  2014;  Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2015)   and in these cases. 
 molecular investigations  have become increasingly instrumental in the recognition of new species of  myxomycetes. . BRIEF HISTORY OF THE TAXONOMY OF MYXOMYCETES Fruiting bodies of several species of myxomycetes are funguslike in appear- ance and the first species noted in the literature were classified within the fungi  (Figs. 
7 1, 7 2)  A good example is the species now called Lycogala epidendrum. .  Linnaeus (1753) referred it to the genus Lycoperdon, apparently based on its  gasteromycete-like habit. . It was known already in pre-Linnaean times thanks  to its common occurrence and large size, mostly around 10 mm in diameter. .  A figure and description by Panckow (1654) are believed to refer to L. 
epiden- drum (Lister, 1925) and may be the oldest myxomycete description possible to  identify as to species. . Despite the fact that Micheli (1729) demonstrated impor- tant distinctions from the gasteromycetes and erected the genus Lycogala. .  the  species remained in Lycoperdon and was associated with fungi all through the  second half of the 18th century. 
The Botanical Congress in Vienna in 1905 set the starting point for the no- menclature of the myxomycetes to 1753. .  the year of the publication of Lin- naeus’s Species Plantarum and the nomenclatural starting point for most groups  of organisms. . Linnaeus did not focus much attention on organisms regarded  as fungi. . A scanning of myxomycete names in current use turns up Linnaeus’s  name in only four combinations, namely L. 
epidendrum, Diderma radiatum,  Arcyria denudata, and Fuligo septica. . All four species form large fructifications  or conspicuous aggregations of fruiting bodies. 
The true nature of these species  was of course unknown at this time and all four were regarded as fungi. . The  first two species were referred to the genus Lycoperdon and were described in  the first (Linnaeus, 1753) and second (Linnaeus, 1763) editions, respectively,  of his Species Plantarum. . Arcyria denudata was referred to the genus Clathrus  and described in the first edition, whereas F. . septica was referred to the genus  Mucor in the second edition. 
Fries (1829) regarded the myxomycetes as related to gasteromycetes but  because of their possession of motile cells and a plasmodium in the life cycle  they were accommodated in a distinct suborder. .  the Myxogastres. 
 within the  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    211 Order Gasteromycetes in his monumental work Systema mycologicum. . The  name Myxogastres was retained in the monograph by Massee (1892). . During  the second half of the 18th century and early decades of the 19th century a sub- stantial number of new species were described by various authors whose names  persist in author combinations of species accepted today. 
Among these authors  are, Batsch (1783–89), Leers (1789), Persoon (1794), Schrader (1797), and de  Schweinitz (1822, 1832). . For a more extensive list of authors see Martin and  Alexopoulos (1969). 
When the life cycle of Myxomycetes was studied in more detail after the  middle of the 19th century. .  thanks to the availability and improved quality of  microscopes. .  it became evident that they were closer to amoeboid protozoa than  to fungi in structure and life cycle. .  and the name Mycetozoa was proposed (de  Bary. .  1858   1859   1864; Rostafiński. 
 1873)  This name reflected the funguslike  appearance of the fruiting bodies and the animal-like presence of motile cells. .  An important advance in the study of the Mycetozoa was the monograph by  Rostafiński (1874–75) with supplement (Rostafiński. .  1876)   considered to be  the first published treatise on the taxonomy of these organisms. 
The name My- cetozoa prevailed for several decades and was used by various authors although  sometimes (Macbride. .  1899   1922) with inclusion of organisms not closely as- sociated with myxomycetes in phylogenetic systems of today. . The same name  was used in the narrower sense by Lister (1894) in the important A Monograph  of the Mycetozoa and by Hagelstein (1944). . Lister’s monograph was essentially  based on the collections in the British Museum (now called the Natural His- tory Museum, NHM). 
Apart from keys and descriptions, it contained excellent  illustrations including microscopic details. . It was a book that set the standard  for several forthcoming monographs. . Two later editions followed in 1911 and  1925, both revised by his daughter Gulielma Lister and with most of the il- lustrations in color. 
Despite the linguistic meaning of the name Mycetozoa, the  group remained associated with and included within the fungi s. . lat  although at  different taxonomic levels. . From the middle of the 20th century “myxomyce- tes” has been the name used for this group of organisms in almost all literature. .  The name was first employed by Link (1833) and Wallroth (1831–33). 
 but as  a suborder and “ordo”. .  and by Winter (1880) as a class. .  but did not come into  common use until the monographs by Macbride and Martin (1934) and Martin  (1949). 
These authors regarded the myxomycetes as a class of the fungi. . Numerous papers with descriptions of new species of myxomycetes have been  published during the past few decades. . During the past 30 years, more than 380  new species have been described. 
Field investigations into poorly explored geo- graphical regions. .  studies of new ecological niches and the application of the moist  chamber culture technique have resulted in a growing number of known species. .  Currently, about 1000 species in 64 genera are recognized (Lado, 2005–16). . North America is an excellent example of how the knowledge of the myxo- mycete biota of a continent has grown and developed. 
The first extensive collec- tions and publications were those by de Schweinitz (1822. .  1832)   which were  212     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology followed by a large number of other collectors and contributors (for names. .  see  Martin and Alexopoulos. 
 1969)  The first general accounts of the continent’s  myxomycetes were those by Cooke (1877) and Morgan (1893–1900). . In 1899,  Macbride published the first edition of his North-American Slime-Moulds. . This  publication, in his own words, had grown out from his previous reports of the  myxomycetes of Iowa. . A second revised and much extended edition was pub- lished in 1922. 
 comprising “all species of myxomycetes hitherto reported from  the continent of North America.” This was an important book that became the  basis for the Myxomycetes by Macbride and Martin (1934). . In 1944, Hagelstein  published The Mycetozoa of North America. . It was based on the extensive col- lections in the herbarium of the New York Botanical Garden brought together  by earlier collectors, but it also included most of his own large collections. 
The  myxomycete volume (vol. . I, part 1) in the North American Flora series, was  published by Martin in 1949. . There is no later monograph specifically deal- ing with all species found in North America. 
There are   however   contributions  dealing with the myxomycete biota of a particular state. .  such as California  (Kowalski. .  1966   1967   1973; Kowalski and Curtis. .  1968   1970) and Colorado  (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2003)  One of the most extensively collected states is Ohio;  Keller and Braun (1999) published a summary of all species known from that  state and also presented the collectors behind the fieldwork. . Studies of minute organisms that were previously included in the myxomy- cetes revealed significant differences and diversity in structure and life cycles. .  The so-called acrasid slime molds had been discovered (Brefeld, 1869) and  studied during the second half of the 19th century (van Tieghem, 1880). . An  increasing number of minute organisms with a naked amoeba-like stage in  their life cycle have been found and studied during the 20th and 21st centuries. .  They differ from myxomycetes in extremely minute fruiting bodies and, often,  simpler life cycles. 
The simplest group is referred to as the protostelids. . There  are, however, considerable differences among species, and protostelids may not  necessarily be a monophyletic group (Shadwick et al., 2009). 
Spores may be  one- or two-celled and flagellated cells present or absent, and the assimilative  stadium and fruiting bodies may be different from one genus to another. . Based  on this, several new orders have been described at the same taxonomic level as  the myxomycetes, all within the kingdom Protozoa, distinctly set apart from  kingdom Fungi. . The evolutionary branch that leads to the myxomycetes and  other groups of slime molds. 
 such as protostelids and dictyostelids. .  is called  the Amoebozoa (Cavalier-Smith. 
 1998   2013) and is clearly separate from the  branch from which fungi and animals have evolved. . GROSS SYSTEMATICS WITHIN MYXOMYCETES The vast majority of myxomycetes are endosporous. 
 which means that spores  are produced inside fruiting bodies. .  the spore mass being enclosed by a wall. 
 a  peridium. .  of varied structure. 
In some genera the peridium may be ephemeral,  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    213 disappearing early during the development of the fruiting body. . The endospo- rous species are currently grouped into five orders. . The sole genus Ceratiomyxa  is exosporous, meaning that the structures traditionally interpreted as spores  are borne externally on minute stalks from a columnar or differently shaped  hypothallus. . Exosporous Myxomycetes Order Ceratiomyxales The different nature of the genus Ceratiomyxa in the possession of exospores  had been recognized already by earlier workers and the genus had been referred  by Rostafiński (1873) to a separate “Cohors” called Exosporeae. .  separate from  the endosporous species. 
The external spores are borne at tips of stalks protrud- ing from erect pillar-shaped structures. . Macbride (1899) retained the subclass  Exosporeae whereas the endosporous species were accommodated in the sub- class Myxogastres. 
This version of classification was followed by all monogra- phers prior to the world monograph by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969). .  where  for nomenclatural reasons the subclasses were renamed Ceratiomyxomycetidae  and Myxogastromycetidae. .  respectively. 
Gilbert (1935) compared the exospore on its stalk with a stalked fruitbody  of an endosporous species. .  homologizing the pillar-shaped matrix on which the  stalked spores are borne with the hypothallus of an endosporous species. . In the  same paper, the unique stages in the spore germination process were demon- strated. 
Although several observations on Ceratiomyxa were published earlier  by other authors. .  including a thorough study by Lister (1916). .  Gilbert was the  first to describe the unique “thread phase” stage in the life cycle. 
Later stud- ies involving SEM and TEM investigations (Nelson and Scheetz, 1975, 1976;  Scheetz et al., 1980) have further demonstrated the unique features of the ger- mination process in Ceratiomyxa. . These clearly set Ceratiomyxa apart from all  endosporous myxomycetes. 
A very thin and completely transparent film under  the matrix is nowadays interpreted as a true hypothallus. . As further minute organisms with an amoeba-like stage in their life cycle  have been discovered and studied. .  Ceratiomyxa seems to be phylogenetically  more closely related to species now called protostelids among the so-called cel- lular slime molds. . New species of this group are continuously being discovered  and described. 
The cellular slime molds, as understood today, comprise minute  organisms of low structural organization, not necessarily closely interrelated but  representing different evolutionary lines. . Ceratiomyxa has fruiting bodies (the  structures originally called exospores) the same size as most of the protostelids. .  It still deviates in details of the life cycle, but there are significant differences  in the life cycles also among protostelids (Olive, 1975; Scheetz, 1972; Scheetz  et al., 1980). . At least four species of Ceratiomyxa are recognized today, but all  detailed studies of the life cycle have been based on C. . fruticulosa. 
Although not  regarded as a true myxomycete in the strictest sense. .  Ceratiomyxa is normally  214     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology included in monographs and inventories of myxomycetes as a separate subclass. .   Ceratiomyxomycetidae. . Endosporous Myxomycetes Fundamental features in the subdivision of the endosporous myxomycetes into  orders have been the color of the spores in mass along with the presence or ab- sence of capillitium and calcium in the fruiting bodies. 
Macbride (1922) recog- nized five orders that were later reduced to four (Macbride and Martin, 1934), a  classification that was followed by Martin (1949) in the North American Flora. .  The orders were Liceales (= Cribrariales), Trichiales, Stemonitidales and Phy- sarales. . These four orders were still, with minor changes, accepted in the world  monograph by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969), but a fifth order, the Echinoste- liales, was added. 
The weakest point in this classification is the Liceales, where  the most important distinguishing feature is the absence of a capillitium. . It is a  basic principle in modern systematics never to base a taxon on the absence of  a character. 
Order Liceales (=Cribrariales) The order Liceales was first recognized by Jahn (1928) and Macbride and Mar- tin (1934) and was retained in more or less the same circumscription throughout  the 20th century in monographs. . As already mentioned the basic feature of the  order is the absence of a capillitium, although a so-called pseudocapillitium is  present in several genera. . In the classic circumscription of the order. 
 the fruiting  bodies exhibit an extremely wide range of variation in size and shape. .  from spo- rangia 0.1 mm (sometimes even less) wide in some species of Licea to cushion- shaped aethalia 10 cm or more across in Reticularia. . There is also a great varia- tion in spore color and plasmodium type. 
The order has long been supposed to  be an unnatural taxon (Eliasson. .  1977)   comprising a mixture of species that  simply do not easily fit into the other orders. .  and there is growing evidence of  its polyphyletic origin (Eliasson. .  2017)  The genus Licea, in the classic circumscription, incorporates forms that  lack both a capillitium and a pseudocapillitium. 
The number of known spe- cies has grown during the past 4 decades. .  thanks to the exploration of new  habitats. 
 an increasingly frequent use of the moist chamber culture technique. .   better technical equipment and more interest in the genus. . Martin and Alexo- poulos (1969) recognized 19 species. . Many new species have been described  during the past 30 years and now (Jun. . 2016) about 70 species are accepted  (Lado, 2005–16). 
A critical review of the stipitate species has relegated sev- eral earlier names to synonymy (Wrigley de Basanta and Lado, 2005). . The  genus probably incorporates a wide assemblage of forms that are not neces- sarily closely related. 
The vast majority of species possess very small fruiting  bodies and the minute size of several species makes them technically difficult  to handle. . The relatively simple morphology of many minute fruiting bodies  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    215 adds to the difficulties in tracing relationships based only on morphological  features. . A few of the minute species have fruiting bodies with outstanding mor- phological features. . For example, L. 
kleistobolus has a specialized dehiscence  mechanism (Eliasson, 2017) with a morphologically different lid. . Protuberanc- es from the lid into the cavity of the sporotheca may be fingerlike and reminis- cent of a capillitium. . Several species of the subgenus Licea possess processes  along the margins of the peridial plates that appear to function in the separation  of peridial plates at dehiscence. . These processes could be interpreted as a rudi- mentary capillitium (Gilert, 1985). 
Licea fimicola seems to be the only species that has been removed from  the genus during the past few decades. . It was transferred to a genus of its own  (Kelleromyxa) based on several important differences (Eliasson et al., 1991)  and with the sole species K. . fimicola  This taxon has a phaneroplasmodium  with distinct veins and typical protoplasmic streaming and there are thread- like structures in the sporotheca reminiscent of a true capillitium. . The gener- ally fusiform to ovoid fruiting bodies are often clustered in small groups and  do not resemble the fruiting bodies of any other species in the genus Licea. .  The spores are also unique in morphological detail. .  being black in mass and  marked with up to 3 µm long thin truncate processes covering more than two- thirds of the spore surface. .  with the rest of the spore nearly smooth. . Molecu- lar data have confirmed the anomaly of L. 
fimicola as a member of the genus  Licea. . Based on molecular data Kelleromyxa has recently been referred to a  family (Kelleromyxaceae) of its own within the order Physarales (Erastova  et al., 2013). . The genus Licea may not be a homogeneous genus even after the removal of  L. . fimicola  The two species Licea variabilis and L. . retiformis differ in several  respects from the rest of the species in being plasmodiocarpous and possessing  a type of phaneroplasmodium in contrast to the protoplasmodium characteristic  of other members of the subgenus Licea (Gilert. .  1987)  In structure and mor- phology, they bear some resemblance to species of Perichaena and Dianema in  the Trichiales. 
Recent molecular data (Fiore-Donno et al., 2013) supported the removal  of L. . variabilis from Licea and pointed to a closer relationship with the genus  Dianema. . Even apart from Licea fimicola and the plasmodiocarpous species L. 
 variabilis (and probably L. . retiformis), the genus Licea demonstrates a large  variation in the structure of the fruiting bodies. . Further molecular studies are en- couraged on a wider range of species of Licea, in particular those with a bright  spore mass and the smallest fruiting bodies. . Several specimens filed under Licea   sp. 
in herbaria, in particular those with bright yellow spores, may actually be  closer to Perichaena (order Trichiales). . There is molecular evidence for a close relationship between certain spe- cies of the order Liceales and species of the order Trichiales (Fiore-Donno  et al., 2005). . The order Liceales in its classical circumscription is falling apart. .  216     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Fruiting bodies of Listerella are very similar in size and in general aspects  to species of Licea and hardly distinguishable from fruiting bodies of Licea  subg. . Licea as viewed under a stereomicroscope. 
The characteristic moniliform  capillitium of Listerella has been the main character distinguishing the genus. .   and some authors have referred it to a separate family (Listerellaceae; Neubert  et al.. .  1993–2000). 
As Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) remarked, Listerella is  “essentially a Licea with a capillitium,” and the sole species L. . paradoxa “has  the peridium and spores of a Licea.” It was later (Martin et al., 1983) referred to  the same family, the Liceaceae. 
The taxonomic significance of the capillitium  in Listerella as a distinguishing generic character is probably overemphasized. .   since internal and sometimes threadlike processes protruding from the peridium  into the sporotheca in some species of Licea may be interpreted as a form of  reduced capillitium. .  and (as noted earlier) the fingerlike processes protruding  from the inner side of the operculum of L. . kleistobolus may resemble a reduced  capillitium (Gilert, 1985). 
The capillitial threads of Listerella are attached near  the margins of the peridial lobes and aberrant capillitial outgrowths may be  reminiscent of the processes bordering the peridial lobes in some species of  Licea (Eliasson and Gilert. .  1982)  Unfortunately, Listerella is difficult to find in the field and the number of  specimens in herbaria is limited. . Published reports of the structure of the plas- modium in Listerella seem to be lacking. .  although there is good reason to be- lieve that it is of the protoplasmodium type; nor are there any molecular data  on the genus. 
Based on morphology, molecular studies will probably support an  inclusion of Listerella in Licea. . Licea versus Perichaena Within the genus Perichaena (order Trichiales) several species may have  a reduced or scantily developed capillitium, for example, P. . liceoides (Gile- rt, 1990, 1997). 
The extent of development of the capillitium may vary among  fruiting bodies within the same fruiting. . Several species of Perichaena de- scribed during the past 10 years have minute fruiting bodies that totally lack a  capillitium, such as P. 
taimyriensis (Novozhilov and Schnittler, 2000) and P. .  polygonospora (Novozhilov et al., 2008). 
Based on morphology, they would  key out to Licea in current determination literature. . Affinities between the two  genera have been suggested (Eliasson, 1977), but thus far there are no molecu- lar data supporting a close relationship (Fiore-Donno et al., 2013). 
The reduction of the capillitium in smaller fruiting bodies can be explained  as a strategy in using limited resources as efficiently as possible. . This may  explain why the capillitium is lacking or scantily developed in several of the  minute species found on bark. 
The corticolous environment is often extreme,  with rapid desiccation and limited resources. . If the plasmodium is small and  the resources thus limited. .  it is more important for the organism to use available  resources for the production of spores. .  since spores are more important for the  reproduction and dispersal of the species than is the capillitium. 
Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    217 Order Echinosteliales The order Echinosteliales was erected by Martin (1961) for the sole genus  Echinostelium. . The order has later been expanded to include the genera Clas- toderma and Barbeyella. . It is a rather vaguely defined order. 
 identified by  having minute stalked globose fruiting bodies. .  a white to brownish spore  mass. .  variously shaped columella and a mostly poorly developed capillitium  that may even be totally lacking. . The plasmodium, as is generally the case  in minute species, is a protoplasmodium. . The development of the fruiting  body in Echinostelium appears to be of a different type than those of the two  main types subhypothallic and epihypothallic (Clark and Haskins. 
 2014)    which have been described for myxomycetes. . As to the extent of capillitium  development in Echinostelium, there is a continuous series from being rela- tively well developed in E. . minutum to being totally lacking in species like  E. 
brooksii, E. . lunatum, and several other species. . There is an interesting  presumed link between the genus Echinostelium and the protostelids. . The  smallest species in the genus (E. . bisporum) was described originally as a pro- tostelid (Olive and Stoianovitch, 1966). . The fruiting bodies are only about  20 µm tall and have only two spores. . Barbeyella has been placed in the Echinosteliales based on general mor- phology. 
 possession of a protoplasmodium and molecular data (Fiore-Donno  et al.. .  2012)   but the epihypothallic sporophore development (Schnittler  et al.. .  2000) and the dark spores raise doubt about its phylogenetic relations. .  The divergence in the color of the spores, also noted in the genus Clastoderma,  has been hypothesized by Kretzschmar et al. . (2016) as a loss or lack of expres- sion of the genes involved in spore color. 
The sole species of the genus Semimorula (S. . liquescens) is a minute organ- ism that for a long time remained enigmatic, with affinities to both myxomyce- tes and protostelids (Haskins et al., 1983). . It was incorporated in Echinostelium  by Kretzschmar et al. . (2016) but differs in unstalked fruiting bodies and the way  the spores germinate. . However, molecular data place Semimorula in the midst  of Echinostelium (Fiore-Donno et al., 2009). . Order Trichiales In the order Trichiales. 
 the spore mass is mostly bright-colored. .  ranging from  almost white to yellow or reddish brown; the capillitium is typically well de- veloped and consists of free or attached. 
 simple or branched threads. .  which  are often ornamented. 
A columella is never present. . In the rather few species  where the fruiting body development has been studied, it has been found to  be subhypothallic. 
As compared to the treatment in Martin and Alexopoulos  (1969), it is now widely accepted that Listerella should be removed and placed  with Licea. . A new genus (Arcyriatella) has been recognized (Hochgesand and  Gottsberger, 1989) which is morphologically intermediate between Arcyria and  Minakatella. . As currently accepted, several genera are vaguely defined. 
Thus,  the borderline between Trichia and Hemitrichia is blurred by plasmodiocarpous  218     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology forms of Trichia contorta. . Several species have been referred alternatively to  Arcyria and Hemitrichia. . For example, this is the case for Arcyria stipata and  A. . leiocarpa  A capillitium is typically always present in species of this order but highly  variable as to extent and structure. 
It may consist of simple or branched threads  or form a net. . The threads are solid or tubular, free or attached, almost colorless  to brightly colored. . Threads may be almost smooth but are mostly distinctly  ornamented with spirals, spines, cogs, or a combination of various processes. .  The structure of the capillitium is diagnostic and generally of the same type  within a genus. 
Nannenga-Bremekamp (1982) used polarized light to compare selected  species of myxomycetes as to their birefringence capacity. . Although a bi- refringent capillitium was found only in species of the Trichiales, several  species of the order lacked this capacity. . Birefringence was demonstrated in  several genera not at all related to the order and in other parts of the fruiting  body. 
It is probably a feature to which not too much taxonomic weight should  be given. . The recently established genus Trichioides has a unique combination of  characters, some of which point to an affinity with the genus Licea in the Lice- ales (Novozhilov et al., 2015). 
Order Physarales Distinguishing features of the order Physarales have traditionally been the  dark spore mass combined with the presence of calcium in the peridium,  stalk, and/or capillitium. . The plasmodium is a phaneroplasmodium and the  fruiting body development is subhypothallic (for further references, see  Clark and Haskins, 2014). 
With the inclusion of Elaeomyxa and Diachea  in the order, Martin et al. . (1983) recognized 16 genera in the Physarales. .  Protophysarum has been interpreted as a link between the Echinosteliales  and the Physarales. .  but the phaneroplasmodium and the subhypothallic  fruiting body development place it closer to the latter order (Blackwell and  Alexopoulos. 
 1975)  Although the presence of calcium. .  often wrongly referred to as lime in the  myxomycete literature. 
 is one of the characteristics of the order Physarales. .  it  may occur in fruiting bodies of species elsewhere in the system. .  for example. 
 in  Perichaena (Trichiales). .  Cribraria (Cribrariales). .  or Lamproderma (Stemoni- tidales). 
In the Physarales. .  it is normally noncrystalline and forming granules  in the family Physaraceae but mostly crystalline and often “star-shaped” in the  family Didymiaceae. .  one of the classical distinctions between the two families  in reference works. 
Environmental conditions may in certain cases influence the  abundance of calcium and the shape of crystals. . Calcium may occur as a carbon- ate in globular or crystalline form but also occurs in other forms—phosphate,  oxalate, and silicate (Schoknecht and Keller, 1989). 
Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    219 Several species bridge the gap between Physarum and Badhamia, for exam- ple, P. . decipiens and to some extent the whole P. . decipiens–P. . serpula–P  au- riscalpium complex. 
Today, there is no molecular support for maintaining the  two physaraceous genera as hitherto circumscribed. . The vague differences be- tween the genera Physarum. 
 Badhamia   Craterium. .  and Fuligo were discussed  by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969). 
 who kept them separate. .  mainly for practi- cal reasons. .  since they are generally recognizable. 
A bit of conservatism may  always be justified to avoid unnecessary name changes and new combinations. .   but provided the phylogenetic evidence is strong and backed by molecular data. .   the taxonomy used today should whenever possible reflect evolutionary lines. 
 Among the generic names Physarum, Badhamia, and Craterium, the first name  is the oldest, dating back to 1794. . Fuligo, the only consistently aethalioid genus,  dates back to 1768. 
If that genus were to be part of a merger, the number of nec- essary new combinations would be almost 200. . Conservation of generic names  may help to keep the number of new combinations low and should be used  when appropriate. .  as has been done with genera of other orders (Doweld. 
 2015;  Lado. .  2001; Lado and Pando. .  1998; Lado et al.. 
 2005)  Order Stemonitidales The order Stemonitidales has mostly been regarded as relatively well defined  by morphological and developmental characters. .  in the classical description en- compassing species with a dark spore mass. 
 a true columella. .  a mostly well  developed and branched capillitium and. .  for the majority of species. 
 a special  type of plasmodium called an aphanoplasmodium. .  and an epihypothallic de- velopment of the fruiting body (Clark and Haskins. 
 2014)  Nevertheless, great  changes have taken place in the inclusion and perception of genera within the  order during recent decades. . With the exclusion of Schenella, which was finally  shown to be a gasteromycete (Estrada-Torres et al., 2005), 15 genera were in- cluded in the order by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969). . This number was later  reduced to 11 when Barbeyella and Clastoderma were transferred to the Echi- nosteliales and Elaeomyxa and Diachea were placed in the Physarales (Martin  et al., 1983). . The two latter genera both combine characteristics of the Stemoni- tidales and the Physarales. 
In Elaeomyxa the fruiting body development points  to a closer affinity with the Physarales. .  and the structure and organization of the  capillitium in Diachea resemble the capillitium in certain species of Didymium  in the Physarales (for further references. .  see Martin et al.. 
 1983)  Six new genera have been established by the discovery of new species and  the splitting of older genera (Lado, 2005–16). . The genera Collaria, Paradia- chea, and Paradiacheopsis were segregated from former Comatricha s. 
lat   on characters of the peridium. .  capillitium. 
 and stalk structure. .  Meriderma was  excerpted from Lamproderma on characters of the capillitium and peridium. .   and Stemonaria and Stemonitopsis were split from Stemonitis and Comatricha  based on the structure of the capillitium and stalk. . 220     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The creation of the many new genera during the past recent decades re- flects the taxonomic difficulties and uncertainties associated with the order. .  Difficulties relating to the delimitation of genera stem from the great vari- ability and intergradations between the extent to which a few morphological  features are expressed (Eliasson et al.. .  2010)  Few characters are absolute,  and genera are normally characterized by a combination of characters. 
A  good example is the structure of the peripheral capillitial net in many species. .  Although a capillitial surface net is a classic character in Stemonitis. .  there are  a few species where the surface net is extremely open and wide-meshed and  very different from that of the vast majority of species. 
The partial surface net  of Stemonitopsis is structurally similar to that of Stemonitis, and a peripheral  capillitial net is also found in a few species of Comatricha s. . str  The extent  of branching and anostomosing of the internal capillitial net is also highly  variable in all of these three genera. . The branching pattern of the capillitium  has traditionally been regarded as an important character for distinguishing  the two genera Comatricha and Lamproderma. 
 but in the latter genus at least  the pattern appears to be plesiomorphic and related to the shape of the spo- rotheca (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008)  Such a key character as a well-developed  capillitial surface net appears to intergrade among a series of taxa into sim- pler branching types. . Comatricha s. 
str  is characterized by normally lacking  a capillitial surface net and possessing a solid stalk that, at least at the base, is  composed of more or less intertwining fibers (Nannenga-Bremekamp, 1967). .  However, a capillitial surface net is found in C. . ellae, and there are species  that sometimes have a hollow stalk like that in Stemonitis. 
The difficulties in generic delimitation. .  as far as morphology is concerned. .  is  well illustrated by Comatricha nigricapillitia. .  which morphologically combines  characters of three genera. 
 resembling Lamproderma in the robust and abruptly  ending columella. .  Comatricha in having the capillitium arising along a large  portion of the columella. .  and Collaria in possessing a peridial collar at the base  of the sporotheca (Moreno et al.. 
 2004)  The situation is further complicated   by data from molecular studies (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2008)   which suggest that  there may actually be two different species involved. .  both belonging to the same  clade as Enerthenema. . As already mentioned. 
 several genera of the Stemonitidales are rath- er vaguely defined morphologically and appear to differ from one another  merely to the extent to which a few basic features are expressed (Eliasson  et al.. .  2010)  Molecular data obtained thus far have indicated that the order  is paraphyletic with the Physarales (Fiore-Donno et al., 2008). . Lamproder- ma appears to be paraphyletic and possible to divide into two distinct clades  (Fiore-Donno et al., 2008). . Molecular data are instrumental for tracing the  evolutionary relationships among the genera. .  and additional molecular inves- tigations are likely to suggest several changes in the circumscription of genera  within this order. . Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    221 As to the future. .  molecular techniques and approaches will almost certainly  change our view of genera and delimitation of genera and perhaps yield some  big surprises. .  just as it has among vascular plants. 
The monumental book by  Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) appeared earlier than a half century ago, when  molecular techniques were almost unknown. . The gross taxonomic system has  remained more or less unchanged since then, and there seems to be molecular  support for most of our basic ideas on the systematics of the myxomycetes. . One  of the big challenges is the genus Licea and the former order Liceales. . As to  the order, we already know through molecular evidence that Cribraria is a very  basal side branch (Fiore-Donno et al., 2013). . In the future, we may even find  that it deserves the rank of a higher level of its own. 
TAXONOMIC LITERATURE ON THE MYXOMYCETES Almost 50 years have passed since the publication of the world monograph The  Myxomycetes by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969). . The book represented a major  taxonomic platform by stimulating interest in these organisms and encouraging  further studies. . A considerable number of myxomycete papers now appear every  year and among them are several books. . Many books published during the past  50 years are of a monographic nature but geographically restricted. 
Examples in- clude Sluzowce Polski (Krzemieniewska. .  1960)   De Nederlandse Myxomyceten  (Nannenga-Bremekamp. .  1974)   with the English translation A Guide to Temperate  Myxomycetes (Nannenga-Bremekamp. .  1991)   Flora Neotropica Monograph No. 
 16  Myxomycetes (Farr, 1976), The Myxomycetes of Japan (Emoto, 1977), Indian  Myxomycetes (Lakhanpal and Mukerji, 1981), Definitorium Fungorum Rossiae. .  Divisio Myxomyctota (Novozhilov. 
 1993)   the volume Myxomycetes I of the Flora  Mycologica Iberica (Lado and Pando. .  1998)   The Myxomycete Biota of Japan (Ya- mamoto. .  1998)   The Myxomycetes of Britain and Ireland (Ing. .  1999)   Myxomy- cetes of New Zealand (Stephenson. .  2003)   Flora Fungorum Sinicorum. 
Myxomy- cetes (Li et al., 2008a,b) and Limasienet (Finnish myxomycetes) (Härkönen and  Sivonen, 2011). . The three-volume work Die Myxomyceten (Neubert et al., 1993– 2000) treats the myxomycetes of Germany and neighboring regions of the Alps. .  Les Myxomycètes (Poulain et al., 2011) essentially covers the species of central Eu- rope but includes numerous species thus far found only in other parts of the world. 
 The two latter works are richly illustrated with color pictures of the highest quality. .  All published and beautifully illustrated books facilitate and stimulate further stud- ies. 
However, many taxonomic problems often lurk behind many of the extensive  descriptions and beautiful illustrations. . There are many re``search projects that can  be directed toward species regarded as well known. . Our circumscription of several  species may well be changed in the future, new species will be recognized and  names now in current use will be relegated to synonymy. 
The online nomenclatural  information system of the Eumycetozoa created by Lado (2005–16) greatly facili- tates staying up-to-date with the progress made in the taxonomy of myxomycetes. . 222     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology CLASSIFICATION OF THE MYXOMYCETES (FROM CLASS   TO GENERA. .  WITH REFERENCES TO THE PROTOLOGUE   AND A BRIEF DIAGNOSIS OF THE MOST RELEVANT  DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERS) The classification of living organisms is structured in a hierarchy of inclusions. 
 in  which a group includes other minor groups and is. .  in turn   subordinate to a larger  one. 
Each group is assigned a taxonomic rank or taxonomic category that accom- panies the name of the group (orders, families, genera, species, etc.). . However,  there is no single classification since the differentiating characters of the groups  may receive different value or interpretation. . In the last two centuries, the classifi- cation of the myxomycetes has been changed, based on increased scientific knowl- edge of the group. 
Persoon in his Synopsis Methodica Fungorum. .  published in  1801. 
 was the first who paid serious attention to the classification of myxomycetes. .   and included among the fungi in their Angiocarpi class. .  order Dermatocarpi. 
Fries  (1829). .  in his Systema mycologicum. .  considered the beginning of modern system- atic mycology. 
 classified the myxomycetes as a suborder (Myxogastres) in the or- der of fungi “Gasteromycetes genuini.” With the studies of de Bary (1864. .  1884)    about the life cycle of myxomycetes. 
 the relationship of the group with the proto- zoans was put in evidence and they were referred to as the Mycetozoa. . But it was  Rostafiński who proposed, in his Versuch eines Systems der Mycetozoen (1873),  the first modern classification of the group. . In Table 7.1 some comparative ex- amples of classification systems from Rostafiński to the present day are presented. 
Rostafiński (1873) produced the first classification of the Myxomycetes where  microscopic characters were considered. . This classification served as the basis for  his Śluzowce Monografia (Rostafiński, 1874–76), considered the first monograph  of the myxomycetes in a modern sense. . Rostafiński’s classification uses some  taxonomic ranks unrecognized today, but it is very detailed and many of the cirt- eria used remain valid. . Arthur Lister, in the classic Monograph of the Mycetozoa  (Lister, 1894), followed basically the criteria of Rostafiński but restructured the  classification of myxomycetes. . In the second edition of this monograph, published  in 1911 and revised by his daughter Gulielma Lister (Lister, 1911), no signifi- cant changes occurred. . However, in the third edition of 1925, the taxonomic ranks  were updated, and were adjusted to current criteria. 
Martin and Alexopoulos in  their monograph The Myxomycetes (1969). .  which is considered an obligate refer- ence and a milestone in the taxonomy of this group. 
 summarized all the taxonom- ic knowledge of myxomycetes available at the time the book was written. . They  considered the myxomycetes to be a group of fungi and adapted their classifica- tion accordingly. . Later   these authors along with Farr published The Genera of  Myxomycetes (1983). .  a condensed version of the previous work in which new data  of taxonomic value. .  such as the type of plasmodia and the morphogenesis of the  stalks of the fruiting bodies. .  were incorporated in the classification of these organ- isms. 
Recently   Cavalier-Smith (2013). .  using Zoological nomenclature. .  proposed  a new classification of the myxomycetes based on evolutionary and phylogenetic  TABLE 7.1 Some Proposals of Classification of the Myxomycetes Rostafiński (1873) Lister (1925) Martin et al. . (1983) Cavalier-Smith (2013) Class Mycetozoa  Cohors Exosporeae    Tribus Ceratiaceae Class Mycetozoa  Subclass Exosporeae     Family Ceratiomyxaceae Class Myxomycetes  Subclass Ceratiomyxomycetidae   Order Ceratiomyxales     Family Ceratiomyxaceae Class Myxomycetes  Subclass Exosporea    Order Ceratiomyxida      Family Ceratiomyxidae  Cohors Endosporeae  Subclass Endosporeae   Ordo Enteridieae    Tribus Lycogalaceae   Ordo Anemeae    Tribus Dictyosteliaceaea    Tribus Liceaceae    Tribus Licaethaliaceae   Ordo Heterodermeae    Tribus Cribrariaceae    Tribus Dictydiaethaliaceae   Ordo Reticularieae    Tribus Reticulariaceae   Ordo Calonemea   Order Lamprosporales    Suborder Anemineae     Family Heterodermaceae     Family Liceaceae     Family Lycogalaceae     Family Reticulariaceae     Family Tubulinaceae    Suborder Calonemineae     Family Arcyriaceae     Family Margaritaceae     Family Trichiaceae   Order Amaurosporales  Subclass Myxogastromycetidae   Order Liceales     Family Cribrariaceae     Family Enteridiaceae     Family Liceaceae   Order Echinosteliales     Family Clatodermataceae     Family Echinosteliaceae   Order Trichiales     Family Dianemaceae     Family Trichiaceae   Order Physarales  Subclass Mixogastria   Superorder Lucisporidia    Order Liceida      Family Cribraridae      Family Dictydiaethalidae      Family Liceidae      Family Listerillidae      Family Tubiferidae    Order Trichiida      Family Arcyridae      Family Dianematidae      Family Minakatellidae    Tribus Arcyriaceae    Suborder Calcarineae     Family Didymiaceae      Family Trichidae    Tribus Perichaenaceae     Family Didymiaceae     Family Elaeomyxaceae    Tribus Trichiaceae     Family Physaraceae     Family Physaraceae   Superorder Collumellidia   Ordo Calcareae    Suborder Amaurochaetineae    Order Echinosteliida    Tribus Cienkowskiaceae    Tribus Didymiaceae    Tribus Physaraceae    Tribus Spumariaceae   Ordo Amaurochaeteae    Tribus Amaurochaetaceae    Tribus Brefeldiaceae    Tribus Echinosteliaceae    Tribus Enerthemaceae    Tribus Stemonitidaceae     Family Amaurochaetaceae     Family Collodermaceae     Family Stemonitaceae  Subclass Stemonitomycetidae   Order Stemonitidales     Family Schenellaceaeb     Family Stemonitidaceae      Family Clastodermatidae      Family Echinosteliidae    Order Fuscisporida     Suborder Physarina      Family Didymiidae      Family Physaridae     Suborder Lamprodermina      Family Lamprodermidae     Suborder Stemonitina      Family Stemonitidae aNow considered a different class. . bNow excluded from the Myxomycetes. . It is a gasteromycete. 
224     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology evidences. . This classification is not yet consolidated but incorporates new and in- teresting information to be taken into consideration to achieve a classification for  the myxomycetes that is as natural as possible. 
Other authors, such as Adl et al. .  (2012) and Ruggiero et al. . (2015), also have published new classifications on the  hierarchical position of the myxomycetes in the higher level of the Tree of Life. 
In  Table 7.2, a summary of the proposal of Cavalier-Smith (2013) is given. . With the idea of summarizing and updating. 
 from class to genera. .  the current  knowledge of the nomenclature and taxonomy of myxomycetes. .  in this chapter  we have presented a classification system where a brief history of the names. .   the ranks proposed. 
 the synonyms. .  and a brief diagnosis of the morphological  distinctive features are included. . Adl et al  (2012) provided descriptions with  many cellular and ultrastructural characters, and we recommend consulting this  publication to supplement some of the diagnoses elaborated here. 
Many exist- ing names were used by authors in the literature of past centuries. .  and these are  difficult to find. .  so the list of names could be incomplete. .  but should still serve  as a starting point for future nomenclatural work. 
Some names also have been  improperly used historically. .  having been attributed to other authors. 
 or are in- valid according to the ICN (McNeill et al.. .  2012); in these cases. .  for clarifica- tion. 
 the correct name and authorship. .  as well as a reference to the articles that  fail to comply. .  are included. 
The classification also includes the authors of the  taxa and a reference to the protologue (original publication where the name is  proposed and the taxon is described). .  which have been abbreviated following  the recommendations of the ICN. . In addition. 
 the principle of priority in the  rank. .  which is stipulated by the ICN as obligate for families. .  as well as for taxa  of lower ranks. .  and recommended for upper ranks. .  has been taken into account. 
For the classification presented, the contributions of Martin (1961, 1966),  Martin and Alexopoulos (1969), Olive (1970, 1975), Alexopoulos (1973, 1978),  Martin et al. . (1983)   Lado (2001). .  and David (2002). 
 who made previous  TABLE 7.2 Hierarchical Position of the Myxomycetes in the Tree of Life  (Cavalier-Smith. .  2013) Domain Eukaryota  Supergroup Podiates (Clade Podiates)   Kingdom Protozoa    Phylum Amoebozoa     Subphylum Conosa      Infraphylum Semiconosia       Parvphylum Mycetozoa        Superclass Macromycetozoa         Class Myxomycetes Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    225 compilations or have analyzed the classification of the myxomycetes through- out history. 
 have been extremely useful. . The web page www.eumycetozoa.com. .   maintained and updated by Lado (2005–16). .  where detailed information on the  nomenclatural status of genera and ranks below genera is compiled. .  represents  another important source of information. 
Additional information on the nomen- clature of myxomycetes was obtained from the following websites or reposito- ries of information www.mycobank.org and www.indexfungorum.org. .  which  regularly provide updated data. . The nomenclature employed in this classification is according to the ICN. .   but as some authors employ Zoological Nomenclature to facilitate cross-ref- erencing the information. 
 we have added. .  in square brackets. .  the equivalent  zoological name. . The PhyloCode has not been taken into account since it is a  developing draft that. .  in its current version. 
 is specifically designed to regulate  the naming of clades but leaves the governance of species names to the Nomen- clature codes. . Possible changes that may occur in the near future, in view of the  results in current phylogenetic papers, are also noted. 
As an example. .  Leontyev  (2015) recently proposed a new classification of myxomycetes that involves  deep changes. .  where the creation of new subclasses. .  superorders. .  orders   and  families would bring about a major relocation of taxa. . These proposals establish  new relationships among taxa that can open up new and interesting research  lines. 
However   the data are still incomplete and are subject to change and the  names are invalid because they do not comply with the rules of ICN; therefore. .   we refer to the names but do not include them in the classification. . Class MYXOMYCETES G. 
Winter, Rabenh. . Krypt.-Fl., ed. . 2, 1(1): 32 (1880) Wallroth in Fl. 
crypt  Germ  2: xxv (Feb.–Mar. . 1833) introduces the name  at the rank of “Ordo” within the Class Fungi. 
Cooke in Contr. . mycol  brit  1  (1877) uses the name at an unspecified supraordinal rank based on Wallroth’s  original coining of the name. . Link in Handbuch 3: 405 (1833) employed the  name Myxomycetes but as suborder. 
Kreisel in Grundz. . Natürl  Syst  Pilze 198  (1969) cites the authority as “Link ex Haeckel” but Haeckel in Gen. . Morphol   Organ  2: xxvi (1866) cites as “stamm” (David, 2002). . Definitely stated to be  a class by Winter (1880). 
Martin and Alexopoulos, Myxomycetes (1969) and  Martin et al., Gen. . Myxomycetes (1983) preferred to base the class on Link  (1833), although later than Wallroth (by a month), the concept is closer to the  “modern” sense of the myxomycetes. 
= Mycetozoa de Bary ex Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 1 (1873) Name originated with “Mycetozoen” de Bary, Bot. . Zeitung (Berlin). 
16:  369 (1858). . Also used by Engler, in Engler and Prantl, Nat. . Pflanzenfam. 
1(1):  1 (1889), as division; by L.S. . Olive, Mycetozoans: 4 (1975), as subphylum, and  Cavalier-Smith, Biol. . Rev  73: 232 (1998), as infraphylum. . = Myxogastres Schröt., in Engler and Prantl, Nat. 
Pflanzenfam. . 1(1): 8  (1889), “as Myxogasteres” Fries, Syst. . mycol  3: 67 (1829), is the first to use the name Myxogastres but  as suborder. . Cooke, Handb. 
Brit  fung  1: 377 (1871) gives the Myxogastres as  226     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology an Ordo in the “family” Gasteromycetes. . Also given in the account by Engler,  in Engler and Prantl, Nat. 
Pflanzenfam. . 1(1): 1 (1889), and Engler, Syllabus  Pflanzenfam., ed. . 1: 1 (1892) as “Myxogasteres.” See also Massee, Monogr. .  Myxogastr.: 28 (1892), as “(Fries),” no rank given, Macbride, N. . Amer  Slime- moulds, ed. 
1  28 (1899) as “Sub-Class,” and Schnittler et al., in Frey (ed.) Syl- labus Pl. . Fam , ed  13, 1(1): 57 (2012), as “subclass Myxogastria L.S. 
Olive”;  given in the “correct” form by Locquin, Numéro spécial Bull. . Soc  Linn  Lyon  1: 235 (Feb. 
1974) and Taxia Fung. . 6 (Jun  1974) as “Myxogastromycetes (Fr.)  Schr.” but subsequently attributed to Feltgen, Vorstud. . Pilz-Fl  Luxemburg 3  (1899) by Locquin in Mycol. 
Gén  Struct  76 (1984), a mistake Feltgen said  “Myxogasteres.” As class “Myxogastrea Fries, 1829, stat. . nov.” in Cavalier- Smith, Microbiol. 
Rev  57: 971 (1993) (ending in accordance with the ICZN). . = Eumycetozoa L.S. . Olive, Mycetozoans 4 (1975), nom. . inval., Art. 
39 1  This name was first introduced by Zopf, in Schenk (ed.), Handb. . Bot 3(2): 97  (1884), but no rank was given. 
Schnittler et al., in Frey (ed.), Syllabus Pfl. . Fam ,  ed  13, 1(1): 46 (2012), cited as “Eumycetozoa (Zopf) L.S. . Olive.” Trophic stage a free-living, multinucleate amoeba, the plasmodium, which  generates static fruiting bodies with spores. . Martin et al. . (1983)   based on the type of development of the fruiting bod- ies and type of plasmodia. 
 recognized. .  in this class. .  three subclasses. 
 Cera- tiomyxomycetidae. .  Myxogastromycetidae. .  and Stemonitomycetidae. 
This  division has been largely accepted and serves as a basis for the general classi- fication presented here. . Cavalier-Smith (2013) recognized only two subclass- es within the Myxomycetes. .  the subclass Exosporeae and Myxogastria. 
 the  first comprising the order Ceratiomyxales. .  a group that some authors exclude  from the myxomycetes. . In the subclass Myxogastria. .  recent phylogenetic  works show two major lineages. 
 light-spored and dark-spored (Fiore-Donno  et al.. .  2005   2010; Kretzschmar et al.. .  2016)   so called superorder Lucispo- ridia and superorder Fuscisporidia. 
 a concept not new. .  since it was used by  Rostafiński (1874–75). .  Cooke (1877). .  and Lister (1925) to differentiate the  two orders. 
 Lamprosporales and Amaurosporales. .  that were recognized within  the Endosporeae subclass. . In the class Myxomycetes 3 subclasses, 6 orders, 15 families, and 64 genera  have been recognized and, according to Lado (2005–16), a total of 980 accepted  species. . Leontyev (2015) proposes a total of 8 orders and 14 families. . Subclass Ceratiomyxomycetidae G.W. 
Martin ex G.W. . Martin and  Alexop., Myxomycetes 32 (1969) Mentioned by G.W. . Martin, in Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary Fungi, ed. 
 5, 497 (1961), but nom. . inval., Art. . 39 1  Farr, in Martin et al., Gen. . Myxomyce- tes: 38 (1983) states that the publication of the name by Martin (1961) is invalid  and attribute the place of publication to Martin and Alexopoulos, Myxomycetes:  32 (1969). . In neither case is a Latin diagnosis provided (David, 2002). . Farr and  Alexopoulos (1977, p. . 214) mentioned that in Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) a  reference is made to the description of “Cohors Exosporeae” by Rostafiński and  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    227 the subclass is. 
 therefore. .  to be authored by G.W. . Martin ex G.W. . Martin and  Alexop. . Also mentioned as class Ceratiomyxomycetes by Hawksworth, Sut- ton, and Ainsworth, Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary of the Fungi, ed. 
7, 257  (1983), but nom. . inval., Art. . 39 1  = Exosporeae Rostaf. . Vers  Syst  Mycetozoen 2.1873, as “cohors” Stated to be at the rank of subclass by Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. 
1, 21,  25 (1894), without reference to Rostafiński, and Macbride, N. . Amer  Slime- moulds, ed. 
1  17 (1899), also by Cavalier-Smith, Eur. . J  Protistol  49: 146  (2013) as subclass “Exosporeae Rostafiński, 1873 stat. . n.” Spores borne singly and externally at the tips of threadlike stalks, on columnar,  dendroid, or morchelloid fruiting bodies. . Consisting of 1 order, 1 family, 1 ge- nus and 4 species. . Order Ceratiomyxales G.W. . Martin ex M.L. 
Farr and Alexop., Mycotaxon  6(2): 213 (1977) [Ceratiomyxida] Based on the order Ceratiomyxales G.W. . Martin, N  Amer  Fl  1(1): 5 (1949),  nom. . inval., Art. 
39 1  With the characters of the subclass. . Consisting of 1 family, 1 genus and 4  species. . Family Ceratiomyxaceae J. . Schröt., in Engler and Prantl, Nat. . Pflanzenfam. 
 1(1): 15 (1889) [Ceratiomyxidae] With the characters of the order (1 genus, 4 species). . Ceratiomyxa J. . Schröt., in Engler and Prantl, Nat. . Pflazenfam. 
1(1): 16  (1889) (4 species) Nom. . cons., see Lado et al., Taxon 54(2): 544 (2005) and Gams, Taxon  54(3): 829 (2005). 
Subclass Myxogastromycetidae G.W. . Martin, in Ainsworth and Bisby’s  Dictionary of Fungi, ed. 
5, 497 (1961), nom. . inval., Art. . 39.1 This name was also mentioned by Alexopoulos (1973, 1978); Ross (1973)  emended the concept of this subclass. . = Myxogastrea L.S. . Olive, Bot. 
Rev (Lancaster). . 36: 77 (1970) “as Myxo- gastria,” nom. . inval., Art. . 39.1 Refers to Macbride, N. . Amer  Slime-moulds 20 (1899), as “subclass” Myxo- gastres (Fr.) T. . Macbr., based on Fries, Syst. 
mycol  3: 3, 67 (1829) as suborder. .  Also proposed by Cavalier-Smith, Eur. 
J  Protistol  49: 146 (2013) as subclass  “Myxogastria Fries, 1829 stat. . n.” = Endosporeae Rostaf., Vers. 
Syst  Mycetozoen 2 (1873), as “cohors”  Stated to be at the rank of subclass by Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. 
1  [21]  (1894). . Also mentioned by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  10 (1877) as division. 
Spores borne in mass, on inside of fruiting bodies of various types. . Development  of fruiting bodies subhypothallic, the plasmodial protoplasm rising internally  through the developing stalk in stipitate forms. . Fruiting bodies sporocarpic,  plasmodiocarpic, aethalioid, or pseudoaethalioid, stalked or sessile, with or  without calcareous deposits. . Peridium continuous with stalk and hypothallus,  persistent to evanescent. . Stalk   when present. 
 filled with calcium compounds. .   228     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology granules. .  particles of refuse matter. .  sporelike cells. .  or with waxy or oil in- clusions. 
Columella usually absent, sometimes present. . Assimilative stage of  various types (protoplasmodium or phaneroplasmodium), but never a true apha- noplasmodium. . Consisting of 4 orders, 13 families, 45 genera, and 765 species. 
Cavalier-Smith (2013). .  applying zoological nomenclature. .  recognized with- in the subclass Myxogastria two superorders (Table 7.1). 
 superorder Lucispo- ridia Caval.-Sm.. .  2013 (light-spored) and superorder Columellidia Caval.-Sm.. .   2013 (columella present). 
The first superorder comprises the orders Liceales  E. . Jahn (Liceida) (a synonym of Cribrariales T. 
Macbr.) and Trichiales T.H. .  Macbr  (Trichiida), characterized by clear or brightly colored spores. 
The super- order Columellidia, characterized by a columella present or ancestrally present,  includes the order Echinosteliales G.W. . Martin (Echinosteliida), with pale or  dark spores, and the new order Fuscisporida Caval.-Sm., 2013 (dark spores). . In  this new order the author recognized three suborders Lamprodermina Caval.- Sm., 2013, Stemonitina Caval.-Sm., 2013, and Physarina Caval.-Sm., 2013. 
 Recently, Kretzschmar et al. . (2016, p  5) have raised the order Fuscisporida  to the rank of superorder Fuscisporidia Fiore-Donno. .  2013   and including the  three orders Echinosteliales (Echinosteliida). .  Stemonitidales (Stemonitida). .  and  Physarales (Physarida). . Leontyev (2015) raised the superorder Columellidia to  the rank of subclass. . None of these authors recognize the different develop- ment (morphogenesis) of the stalk of the members of the order Stemonitidales. .  a  character highlighted by Ross (1973) and that we consider of relevant evolution- ary value. . Furthermore. 
 these authors do not consider that most species of the  order Echinosteliales have brightly colored spores. .  instead of dark spores. .  and  they justified the loss of pigment in the spores as an evolutionary hypothesis. 
Order Echinosteliales G.W. . Martin, Mycologia 52(1): 127 (1961) [“1960”]  [Echinosteliida] The concept of the order was emended by Alexopoulos, in Alexopoulos and  Brooks, Mycologia 63(4): 927 (1971). 
Fruiting bodies sporangiate, without calcareous deposits in their structures,  stalked, usually less than 1000 µm in total height. . Stalk filled with granular  material. 
Columella present. . Capillitium usually scanty, smooth. 
Spores in mass  white, brightly colored, sometimes brownish to blackish. . Consisting of 2 fami- lies, 4 genera, and 19 species. . Family Clastodermataceae Alexop. . and T E  Brooks, Mycologia 63(4): 926  (1971) [Clastodermatidae] Plasmodium of the protoplasmodium type. 
Fruiting bodies minute, 200– 1300 µm high. . Peridium partially evanescent, usually remaining as a col- lar around the stalk, also attached to the peripheral capillitial threads. . Stalk  filled with granular material in its lower part. . Columella present. . Capillitium  well developed. 
Spores in mass brownish to blackish (2 genera, 4 species). . Barbeyella Meyl., Bull. . Soc  Bot  Genève 6: 89 (1914) (1 species) Clastoderma A. . Blytt, Bot. . Zeitung (Berlin) 38: 343 (1880) (3 species) Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    229 Family Echinosteliaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  53 (1877)  [Echinosteliidae] Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 7 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  53 (Jan.–Jul. .  1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. . 1877)  = Heimerliaceae G. . Arnaud, Botaniste 34: 35 (1949), as “Heimerliacées,”  nom. . inval., see Art. . 18.4, 32.1, 63. 
Plasmodium of the protoplasmodium type. . Fruiting bodies minute, 20– 550 µm high. . Peridium completely evanescent, in some cases remaining as a  small and rudimentary collar around the stalk. . Stalk filled with granular ma- terial in its lower part. . Columella present or absent, sometimes with a spore- like body attached to the apex of the stalk. . Capillitium scanty, rudimentary,  or absent. 
Spores in mass white or brightly colored (2 genera, 15 species). . Echinostelium de Bary, in Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 7 (1873)  (14 species) Semimorula E.F. 
Haskins, McGuinn. . and C S  Berry, Mycologia 75(1):  153 (1983) (1 species) This genus has just been synonymized with Echinostelium, see  Kretzschmar et al. . (2016)  Order Cribrariales T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-Moulds, ed. . 2  199 (1922)  [Cribrariida] The name Liceales has been largely applied to this order, but Cribrariales  has priority. . = Lycogalales T. 
Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-Moulds, ed. . 2  232 (1922) = Lamprosporales Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. . 3  2 (1925) Proposed by Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. . 1  22 (1894) as “cohort.” = Liceales E. . Jahn, in Engler and Prantl, Nat. . Pflanzenfam. 
ed  2, 2: 319  (1928) Fruiting bodies with or without calcareous deposits in their structures, sessile or  stalked. . Columella absent. . Capillitium absent, rarely very rudimentary. . Pseudo- capillitium present or absent, when present of tubular, irregular filaments or of  perforated plates that may fray out into threads. . Spores in mass clear or brightly  colored, sometimes olivaceous or brownish. 
Consisting of 4 families, 9 genera,  and 154 species. . The order is not natural; it is a polyphyletic group delimited on the lack of  capillitium. 
Family Cribrariaceae Corda, Icon. . fung  2: 22 (1838) [Cribrariidae] = Lindbladiaceae Locq., Syn. 
gen  fung  (Paris): [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 Fruiting bodies stalked, sporocarpic or rarely pseudoaethalioid. . Peridium  remaining as a preformed net, with spherical calcic granules 0.5–4 µm  diam. 
Capillitum absent. . Pseudocapillitium absent. . Spores in mass clear or  brightly colored (2 genera, 47 species). . Cribraria Pers., Neues Mag. 
Bot  1: 91 (1794) (46 species) 230     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Nom. . cons., see Lado et al., Taxon 54(2): 544 (2005) and Gams, Tax- on 54(3): 829 (2005). 
Lindbladia Fr., Summa veg. . Scand  449 (1849) (1 species) Family Dictydiaethaliaceae Luerss. . Handb  syst  Bot  1: 42 (1877) [Dictydi- aethaliidae] Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 5 (1873), as “tribus.”  Also published as family by Nannenga-Bremekamp (1982) but nomen. . nud.;  see also Nannenga-Bremekamp (1985) but nom. . inval., art. 
38 1  Neubert  et al., Myxomyceten 1: 117 (1993) made a validation and author citation  correction of the proposal of Nannenga-Bremekamp. . = Clathroptychiaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  55 (1877) Published by Rostafiński, Śluzowce monogr. . 38, 224 (1875), but not at  family rank, first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. 
mycol    brit  55 (1877)  Fruiting bodies sessile, pseudoaethalioid. . Peridium remaining in the upper  part as polyhedral plates. 
Capillitium absent. . Pseudocapillitium present, fili- form. 
Spores in mass clear or brightly colored (1 genus, 2 species). . Dictydiaethalium Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 5 (1873) (2 species) Family Liceaceae Chevall. . Fl  gén  env  Paris 1: 343. 
1826, as “Liceae” [Liceidae] Also mentioned by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 4 (1873) as “tribus.” = Protodermataceae Rostaf. 
Ex Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  2, 10 (Jan.–Jul. .  1877), as “Protodermaceae” First published by Rostafiński, Sluzowce monogr. . 90 (1875) but not at  family rank. 
= Orcadellaceae T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2  203 (1922) = Listerellaceae E. 
Jahn ex Neubert et al., Myxomyceten 1: 158 (1993) Proposed previously by Jahn, Ber. . Deutsch  Bot  Ges  24:540 (1907)  “(1906),” as “Listerellaceen” but nom. 
inval., art. . 32.1, see art. . 18 4  Also  proposed by Locquin., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), but nom. . inval., Art. 
39 1  Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporangiate or plasmodiocarpic, often  minute. . Peridium remaining in the lower part; without spherical calcic gran- ules. . Capillitium absent, sometimes very rudimentary and scanty. . Pseudo- capillitium absent. 
Spores in mass clear or brightly colored, sometimes oli- vaceous, brownish or black (2 genus, 73 species). . Licea Schrad., Nov. 
gen  pl  16 (1797) (72 species) Listerella E. . Jahn, Ber  Deutsch  Bot  Ges  24: 540 (1907) “(1906)”   (1 species) The monospecific genus Listerella has been considered by some authors  as an independent family. . Family Reticulariaceae Chevall. 
ex Corda, Icon. . fung 5: 22 (1842) [Reticu- laridae] Published by Chevallier, Fl. . gén  env  Paris 1: 341 (1826) as “ordre Re- ticularieae,” nom. . inval., Art. 
32.1, first correctly spelt by Corda (1842). . Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    231 = Lycogalaceae Corda, in Opiz, Naturalientausch (Beiträge Naturge-  schichte 12: 637 (1828), nom. 
inval., Art. . 32.1 In Corda, Icon. . fung  5: 22 (1842), the name is used at a subfamilial rank. . = Licaethaliaceae Rostaf. 
ex Luerssen, Handb. . syst  Bot  1: 41 (Dec. 
1877), Mentioned by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 4 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 41  (Dec. . 1877)  = Heterodermaceae Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. 
1  136 (1894), nom. . in- val., Art. . 32.1, see Art. 
18.1 = Tubulinaceae Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. . 1  152 (1894) = Tubiferaceae T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. 
2  203 (1922) = Alwisiaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 = Enteridiaceae M.L. . Farr, Mycologia 74(2): 339 (1982) Previously proposed by Locquin, Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972) but nom. .  inval., Art. 
32 1  Fruiting bodies sessile, rarely stalked, aethalioid or pseudoaethalioid. . Pe- ridium remaining in the lower part. . Capillitium absent. . Pseudocapillitium  present, columnar, tubular or as perforate or frayed membranes. 
Spores in  mass light brown (4 genera, 32 species). . Leontyev, who is carrying out a review of the family Reticulariaceae   (Leontyev, 2015; Leontyev et al., 2014), has proposed a new classifica- tion. . The genus Alwisia is claimed to have a true capillitium (Leontyev  et al., 2014), and, based on the evolution of fruiting bodies, two new genera  have been segregated. . A third genus, Siphoptychium Rostaf., until now con- sidered a synonym of Tubifera (Leontyev, 2016), is reestablished. . Alwisia Berk. 
and Broome, J. . Linn  Soc , Bot  14: 86 (1873) (4 species) Lycogala Adans., Fam. . pl  2: 7 (1763) (6 species) Reticularia Bull., Herb. 
France 7(78–84): pl. . 326 (1787–88) (10 species) Nom. . cons., Art. 
14, see Lado et al., Taxon 47: 109 (1998); Lado and  Pando, Taxon 47: 453 (1998) and Gams, Taxon 50: 270 (2001). . Tubifera J.F. 
Gmel., Syst. . nat  2: 1472 (1792) (12 species) Order Trichiales T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. 
2, 237 (1922)  [Trichiida] Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, calcareous deposits absent in their structures  but occasionally present in the peridium. . Stalk filled with sporelike cells or  granular material. 
Columella absent. . Capillitium present, filiform or tubular,  ornamented. . Spores in mass clear or brightly colored. 
Plasmodium of the apha- noplasmodium type. . Consisting of 4 families, 14 genera, and 184 species. . Family Arcyriaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  69 (1877)   [Arcyriidae] Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 15 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  69 (Jan.–Jul. . 1877), also by  Luerssen, Handb. . syst  Bot  1: 43 (Dec. . 1877)  232     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology = Perichaenaceae Rostaf. 
ex Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  77 (1877) Mentioned by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 15 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  77 (Jan.– Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. . syst  Bot  1: 43 (Dec. 
1877)  Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporangiate or plasmodiocarpic. . Capilli- tium tubular, hollow, ornamented with warts, spines, cogs, ridges, half-rings,  rings or reticulations (5 genera, 87 species). 
Arcyodes O.F. . Cook, Science 15: 651 (1902) (1 species) Arcyria F.H. 
Wigg., Prim. . fl  holsat  109 (1780) (50 species) A species of the genus (Arcyria sulcata Dörfelt and A.R. . Schmidt) is  a fossil found in Baltic amber from the Eocene (Dörfelt et al., 2003) Arcyriatella Hochg. 
and Gottsb., Nova Hedwigia 48(3–4): 485 (1989)  (1 species) Cornuvia Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 15 (1873) (1 species) Perichaena Fr., in Fries and Lindgren, Symb. . gasteromyc. 
2: 11 (1817)  (34 species) Family Dianemataceae T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2, 237 (1922),  as “Dianemaceae” [Dianemidae] Previously proposed by Macbride, N. . Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. 
1, 180  (1899) as “Dianemeae.” = Margaritaceae Lister, Monogr. . mycetozoa, ed. . 1  202 (1894) Based on Margarita Lister, a nom. 
illeg., Art. . 53.1, non Margarita Gaud- in, 1829. 
Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporocarpic or plasmodiocarpic. . Capil- litium filiform, solid, smooth or ornamented with tenuous and irregular spi- rals or reticulations (2 genera, 15 species). 
Calomyxa Nieuwl., Amer. . Midl  Naturalist 4: 335 (1916) (2 species) Dianema Rex, Proc. . Acad  Nat  Sci  Philadelphia 43: 397 (1891) (13  species) Family Minakatellaceae Nann.-Bremek. . ex Neubert et al., Myxomyceten 1:  160 (1993) [Minakatellidae] First proposed by Nannenga-Bremekamp (1982) but nom. 
inval., Art. . 36.1,  also proposed by Nannenga-Bremekamp (1985) but nom. 
inval., Art. . 39 1  Fruiting bodies sessile, pseudoaethalioid. . Capillitium tubular, hollow, al- most smooth (1 genus, 1 species). 
Minakatella G. . Lister, J  Bot  59: 92 (1921) (1 species) Family Trichiaceae Chevall., Fl. . gén  env  Paris 1: 322 (1826) [Trichiidae] = Prototrichiaceae T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2, 258 (1922) Previously proposed by Macbride, N. 
Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 1, 199  (1899) as “Prototrichieae” Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporocarpic or plasmodiocarpic. 
Capil- litium tubular. .  hollow   ornamented with spiral bands. 
 sometimes combined  with spines. .  frequently elateriform. .  ornamentation sometimes faint or ir- regular to rings or almost smooth (6 genera. 
 81 species). . Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    233 Calonema Morgan, J. . Cincinnati Soc. 
Nat  Hist  16(1): 27 (1893) (6 spe- cies) Hemitrichia Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 14 (1873) (26 species) Nom. . cons., see Lado et al., Taxon 54(2). . 545 (2005) and Gams, Tax- on 54(3): 829 (2005). . Metatrichia Ing, Trans. 
Brit  Mycol  Soc  47(1): 51 (1964) (6 species) Oligonema Rostaf., Śluzowce monogr. . 291 (1875) (7 species) Prototrichia Rostaf., Śluzowce monogr. . suppl  38 (1876) (1 species) Trichia Haller, Hist. . stirp  Helv  3: 114 (1768) (35 species) Order Physarales T. 
Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2, 22 (1922) [Phy- sarida] Fruiting bodies with granular or crystalline calcareous deposits on some of their  structures, rarely with oil or wax. . Columella present or absent. . Capillitium pres- ent. 
Spores in mass brown to black. . Plasmodium of the phaneroplasmodium  type. 
Consisting of 3 families, 18 genera, and 408 species. . Family Didymiaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  29 (1877) [Didy- miidae] Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 12 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  29 (Jan.–Jul. .  1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 43 (Dec. . 1877)  = Spumariaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  44 (1877) Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 13 (1873) as “tri- bus,” first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol   brit  29 (Jan.–Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 43  (Dec. . 1877)  = Diachaeaceae Locq., Syn. . Gen  Fung  [1] (1972), nom. 
inval  Art  39 1  = Lepidodermataceae Locq., Syn. . Gen  Fung  [1] (1972), as “Lepidoderma- ceae,” nom. 
inval  Art  39 1  Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporocarpic or plasmodiocarpic, rarely  aethalioid, without oil or wax. . Peridium with granular or crystalline cal- careous deposits, sometimes united to an egg-shell like cover. 
Columella  present or absent, sometimes with a pseudocolumella. . Capillitium filiform,  not calcareous, rarely with some intermixed calcareous nodes (7 genera, 193  species). 
Diachea Fr., Syst. . orb  veg  143 (1825) (13 species) Diderma Pers., Neues Mag. . Bot  1: 89 (1794) (80 species) Didymium Schrad., Nov. . gen  pl  20 (1797) (87 species) Lepidoderma de Bary, in Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 13 (1873)  (9 species) Mucilago Battarra, Fungi arimin. . 76 (1755) (1 species) First employed by Micheli (1729) but pre-Linnaean. 
Physarina Höhn., Sitzungsber. . Kaiserl  Akad  Wiss., Math.-Naturwiss. 
 Cl  118: 431 (1909) (3 species) Trabrooksia H.W. . Keller, Mycologia 72(2): 396 (1980) (1 species) 234     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Family Elaeomyxaceae Hagelst. 
ex M L  Farr and H.W. . Keller, Mycologia  74 (5): 857 (1982) [Elaeomyxidae] Based on Hagelstein, Mycologia 34(5): 594 (1942), nom. . inval., Art. . 39 1  Fruiting bodies stalked, sporangiate, with oil or wax in some parts of their  structures. . Peridium without calcareous deposits. . Capillitium filiform, not  calcareous (1 genus, 4 species). . Elaeomyxa Hagelst., Mycologia 34(5): 593 (1942) (4 species) Family Physaraceae Chevall., Fl. 
gén  env  Paris 1: 332 (Aug. . 2–4, 1826), as  “Physareae” [Physaridae] Nom. 
cons  prop., see Doweld, Taxon 64(6): 1313 (2015). . Also men- tioned by Rostafiński, Vers. 
Syst  Mycetozoen 9 (1873) but as “tribus.” = Fuliginaceae Link, Abh. . Köningl  Akad  Wiss  Berlin 1824 (Phys. . Kl.):  168 (Feb. 
26, 1826), as “Fuligineae” Nom. . rej  prop., see Doweld, Taxon 64(6): 1313 (2015), used as tribe by  Brogniart, Dict. 
33: 550 (1824), also Chevallier, Fl. . gén  env  Paris 1: 346  (Aug. 
2–4, 1826) as “Fulgiaceae.” = Crateriaceae Corda, Icon. . fung  5: 58 (1842), nom. . inval., Art. . 32.1 = Cienkowskiaceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit  10 (1877) Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 9 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  10 (Jan.– Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. . 1877) = Badhamiaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. 
inval., Art. . 39.1 = Leocarpaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 = Trichamphoraceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 = Protophysaraceae A. . Castillo, Illana, and G. . Moreno, Mycol. 
Res  102(7):  842 (1998) = Kelleromyxaceae D. . Erastova, M. . Okun, Novozh., and Schnittler, Mycol. .  Progress 12(3): 605 (2013), nom. 
inval  Art  42  Authors cited as “D. . Erastova, M. . Okun, A M  Fiore-Donno, Novozh.,  and Schnittler” but see erratum, Mycol. . Progress 12(3): 615 (2013) Fruiting bodies sessile or stalked, sporocarpic or plasmodiocarpic, rarely  aethalioid, with calcareous deposits in some parts of their structure, without  oil or wax. . Peridium usually with granular calcareous deposits. 
Columella  absent, rarely present, sometimes with a calcareous pseudocolumella. . Capil- litium a network of hyaline tubules connecting calcareous nodes, sometimes  with branched threads or simple and unbranched peridial outgrowths (10  genera, 211 species). 
Badhamia Berk., Trans. . Linn  Soc  London 21(2): 153 (1853) (31 species) Badhamiopsis T.E. 
Brooks and H.W. . Keller, in Keller and Brooks, My- cologia 68 (4): 835 (1976) (3 species) Craterium Trentep., in Roth, Catal. . bot  1: 224 (1797) (17 species) Fuligo Haller, Hist. . stirp  Helv  3: 110 (1768) (10 species) Kelleromyxa Eliasson, in Eliasson, Keller, and Schoknecht, Mycol. . Res   95(10): 1205 (1991) (1 species) Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    235 Erastova et al. . (2013), taking into account the particular characteris- tics and the phylogeny of the only known species, Kelleromyxa fimi- cola, supported the erection of a monotypic family for this species. 
Leocarpus Link, Ges. . Naturf  Freunde Berlin Mag. . Neuesten Entdeck. .  Gesammten Naturk. 
3: 25 (1809) (1 species) Physarella Peck, Bull. . Torrey Bot. . Club 9(5): 61 (1882) (1 species) Physarum Pers., Neues Mag. . Bot  1: 88 (1794) (144 species) Protophysarum M. . Blackw  and Alexop., Mycologia 67(1): 33 (1975)  (2 species) One species of the genus (Protophysarum balticum Dörfelt & Schmidt)  is a fossil found in Baltic amber (Dörfelt and Schmidt, 2006). 
Cas- tillo et al. . (1998) raised this genus to family rank, but the arguments  do not seem consistent with creating a new family. 
Willkommlangea Kuntze, Revis. . gen  pl  2: 875 (1891) (1 species) Subclass Stemonitomycetidae I.K. . Ross, Mycologia 65 (2): 483 (1973) Cavalier-Smith, Microbiol. . Rev  57: 971 (1993), give an alternative orthog- raphy as “Stemonitia Ross, 1973 orthogr. . emend.,” also Locquin, Tax. 
Fung  6  (1974), as “Stemonomycetidae,” but no description provided. . Spores borne in mass within fruiting bodies of various types. . Development of  fruiting bodies epihypothallic, the plasmodial protoplasm rising externally along  the developing stalk in stipitate forms. . Fruiting bodies sporocarpic, aethalioid  or pseudoaethalioid, stalked or sessile, without calcareous deposits. 
Peridium  not continuous with stalk and hypothallus, persistent or evanescent. . Stalk, when  present, filled with fibers or hollow. 
Columella usually present. . Capillitium of  simple, branched, or anastomosing threads, arising from the columella or from  the sporophore base. 
Assimilative stage an aphanoplasmodium. . Consisting of 1  order, 1 family, 17 genera and 211 species. . Order Stemonitidales T. 
Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2  22,148  (1922), as “Stemonitales” [Stemonitida] = Amaurochaetales Hagelst., Mycetozoa N. . Amer  9 (1944), nom. . inval.,  Art. 
38 1  With the characters of the subclass. . Consisting of 1 family, 17 genera and 211  species. 
Leontyev (2015). .  has proposed raising the order to the rank of superorder and  segregated into 3 orders. .  order Meridermatales. .  with family Meridermataceae. 
  order Stemonitidales. .  comprising the families Stemonitidaceae and Comatricha- ceae. 
 and the more questionable order Lamprodermatales. .  comprising the fami- lies Lamprodermataceae. .  Physaraceae. .  Kelleromyxaceae. .  and Didymiaceae. 
Family Stemonitidaceae Fr., Syst. . Mycol  3(1): 75 (1829), as “Stemonitei,”  sanctioning citation [Stemonitidae] First employed by Fries, Syst. . mycol  3(1): 75 (1829) as “Stemonitei,”  sanctioning citation according to the Index Fungorum (http://www. . indexfungorum.org/names/NamesRecord.asp?RecordID=81588). 
First spelt  236     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology correctly by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 6 (1873) but as “tribus,” first  published as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  45 (Jan.–Jul. . 1877), also  by Luerssen, Handb. . syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. 
1877), both as “Stemonitaceae.” = Enerthenemataceae Rostaf. . ex Cooke, Contr. 
mycol  brit.: 51 (1877), as  “Enerthenemaceae” Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 8 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit.: 51 (Jan.– Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. . 1877)  = Amaurochaetaceae Rostaf. 
ex Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  52 (Jan.–Jul. .  1877), as “Amaurochetaceae” Published by Rostafiński,, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 8 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  52 (Jan.– Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. 
syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. . 1877)  = Brefeldiaceae Rostaf. 
ex Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit.: 52 (Jan.–Jul. . 1877) Published by Rostafiński, Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 8 (1873) as “tribus,”  first spelt correctly and as family by Cooke, Contr. . mycol  brit  52 (Jan.– Jul. . 1877), also by Luerssen, Handb. . syst  Bot  1: 42 (Dec. 
1877)  = Raciborskiaceae Berl., in Berlese, De Toni, and Fischer, Syll. . fung  7: 400  (1888) = Lamprodermataceae T. . Macbr , N  Amer  Slime-moulds, ed. . 2  189 (1922),  as “Lamprodermaceae” = Collodermataceae G. . Lister, in Lister, Monogr. 
mycetozoa, ed. . 3  128  (1925), as “Collodermaceae” = Comatrichaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 = Macbrideolaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
39.1 = Symphytocarpaceae Locq., Syn. . gen  fung  [1] (1972), nom. . inval., Art. 
 39.1 With the characters of the order (17 genera, 211 species). . Amaurochaete Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 8 (1873) (4 species) Nom. . cons., Art. 
14, see Lado et al., Taxon 54(2): 543 (2005) and  Gams, Taxon 54(3): 829 (2005). . Brefeldia Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 8 (1873) (1 species) Collaria Nann.-Bremek., Proc. . Kon  Ned  Akad  Wetensch., C. 
70(2):  208 (1967) (5 species) Colloderma G. . Lister, J  Bot  48: 312 (1910) (4 species) Comatricha Preuss, Linnaea 24: 140 (1851) (40 species) Diacheopsis Meyl., Bull. 
Soc  Vaud  Sci  Nat  57: 149 (1930) (16 spe- cies) Enerthenema Bowman, Trans. . Linn  Soc  London 16: 152 (1830) (4 spe- cies) Lamproderma Rostaf., Vers. . Syst  Mycetozoen 7 (1873) (49 species) Leptoderma G. . Lister, J  Bot  51: 1 (1913) (2 species) Macbrideola H.C. 
Gilbert, Stud. . Nat  Hist  Iowa Univ  16(2): 155 (1934)  (18 species) Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    237 Meriderma Mar. . Mey  and Poulain. .  in Poulain. .  Meyer   and Bozonnet. .   Myxomycètes 1: 551 (2011) (4 species) Leontyev (2015). 
 has proposed to create. .  for this genus. .  a new order  “Meridermatales” and a new family “Meridermataceae.” Paradiachea Hertel. .  Dusenia 7: 349 (1956) (5 species) Paradiacheopsis Hertel. .  Dusenia 5: 191 (1954) (9 species) Stemonaria Nann.-Bremek.. 
 R  Sharma, and Y. . Yamam., in Nannenga- Bremekamp, Yamamoto, and Sharma, Proc. . Kon  Ned  Akad  Wetensch.,  C. 
87(4): 450 (1984) (14 species) Stemonitis Gled., Meth. . fung  140 (1753) (17 species) A species of the genus. .  Stemonitis splendens Rostaf.. 
 has been found  well preserved in Baltic amber from the Tertiary Period. .  of the Eo- cene Epoch (Domke. .  1952; Keller. 
 2012)  Stemonitopsis (Nann.-Bremek.) Nann.-Bremek., Nederlandse Myxomy- ceten (Zutphen) 203 (1975) (10 species) Symphytocarpus Ing and Nann.-Bremek., Proc. . Kon  Ned  Akad   Wetensch., C. 
70(2): 218 (1967) (9 species) Incertae sedis (1 genus, 1 species) Trichioides Novozh., Hoof and Jagers, Mycol. . Progress 14(1018): 2 (2015)  (1 species) This genus shows morphological affinities with members of the order  Trichiales. .  such as the tubular capillitial threads ornamented by spiral bands  characteristic of the genus Trichia. .  and with members of the order Cribrari- ales. 
 such as the spores brown in mass. .  smooth and with a paler thinner  area. 
 a character only seen in some species of the genus Licea (Novozhilov  et al.. .  2015)  THE NEW ERA OF TAXONOMY: HOW NEW TECHNOLOGIES  CAN HELP TO RESOLVE CLASSICAL TAXONOMIC PROBLEMS As previously defined. .  taxonomy deals with the study of identifying. .  group- ing. 
 and naming of organisms. .  based on similarities in such things as structure  and origin. .  according to their established natural relationships. 
Taxonomy is  one of the oldest branches of biology and in its modern form dates back to the  work of Linnaeus in the middle of the 18th century. . Taxonomy is the most  fundamental of life sciences and is becoming crucial in many aspects of life  and society, such as the biodiversity management, public health or agriculture. .  From a practical point of view, taxonomy involves the organization of large  amounts of information. . But before the web, so much of this taxonomic infor- mation was difficult to find, and most of it was hidden in journals that are not  easily accessible. 
The Internet. .  with its great efficiency as a source of information and as a  rapid and effective method of communication. 
 has had a great positive impact  238     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology on the work of taxonomists. 
Web-taxonomy. .  usually called e-taxonomy. 
 takes  advantage of the Internet as a medium to find information. .  to connect special- ists or amateurs working on the same group of organisms. .  and to develop new  tools that make taxonomy work more efficient. . In the case of myxomycetes, it  allows taxonomic information to be found easily and accessibly to be shared,  taxonomic hypotheses to be debated. 
In addition, numerous tools are available  to enable them to perform their work more quickly and efficiently. . However   it  is important not to underestimate the vast task of transferring biodiversity infor- mation to the web. .  not just moving data from paper to digital form. .  but also the  institutional and social challenges of presenting an old science in a new way. . When a new species of myxomycete is discovered or a new rank is to be  proposed, the next step is to publish the results in a journal or other permanent  resource. 
This act has important scientific significance and must fulfill a series  of laws and requirements of the ICN (McNeill et al., 2012). . It is important to  know that a name does not become valid until it is published in accordance with  these requirements. . These current mandatory requirements are: l Providing a Latin or English description or diagnosis of the taxon, or by a  reference to a previously and effectively published description or diagnosis. . l Selecting a type specimen to be deposited in a public herbarium or collection. . l Adding a clear indication of the rank of the taxon involved. 
l Registering the taxon or the name in a recognized repository (Mycobank is  recommended). . It is also recommended that the description is supplemented with an illustra- tion showing the essential characters and that the author’s name is added after  the name of the new taxon even when the authorship of the publication is the  same. . A unique aspect of taxonomy, unlike all other branches of science, is that  taxonomists need to refer to material published in the 19th and even the 18th  century. . Therefore, a taxonomist needs to be very familiar with the species he  works on and also have an intimate knowledge of the often-complex literature  on the group. . This dependence on the literature is the price that has had to be  paid for stability, and it has served the subject well for 250 years. 
However, the  question remains as to whether this can be modified in light of modern means of  communicating and information sharing, especially using the web. . To evaluate the subject, let us identify some problems: l Taxonomic information is highly scattered and difficult to access, which is  an impediment to people who are not experts in the field. . In the case of the  myxomycetes, we usually know the literature of our country or continent  but ignore the rest. . More than 5000 articles or books are known that contain  data on the myxomycetes. .  a figure unknown for many specialists and which  would have been difficult to handle without current computer technology. . l Taxonomic research requires access to an extensive and often very old lit- erature that is available only in major institutions. . For example. 
 the book  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    239 Śluzowce Monografia by Rostafiński (1874–76). .  the first monograph of  myxomycetes in a modern sense. 
 is very rare and difficult to obtain. .  and only  a few copies exist in specialized libraries. . Gaining access to this information  through virtual libraries, for example, can be of great benefit, as you can  read many books remotely. 
This book is now available in several web pages,  such as https://archive.org or www.europeana.eu. . l Printed literature is often a poor medium for taxonomy. . For one thing, it  is expensive, which in particular restricts the use of illustrations. . For ex- ample, in the monographs of myxomycetes in the North American Flora  (Martin, 1949) and Flora Neotropica (Farr, 1976), illustrations could have  resolved some interpretations of the text. 
Fortunately, digital images have  solved most of these problems, given their low cost and easy production and  reproduction. . l The language of some publications, such as classic Polish, Chinese, Ciril- ic, or even Latin, are unfamiliar to many researchers. . The monograph of  Rostafiński, in classic Polish, or De Nederlandse Myxomyceten by Nan- nenga-Bremekamp (1974), which in Dutch, are some examples. 
Computer  translation programs and optical character recognition (optical character  reader) (OCR). .  offer an electronic transversion of images of typed. 
 hand- written. .  or printed text into machine-encoded text. .  allowing a rough idea of  these texts in a short time or almost instantaneously. 
l There is frequently a lack of connection between taxonomists and the people  using their taxonomic products. . Users normally need to know the current  consensus taxonomy of a particular group. .  but consensus is often difficult to  achieve because. .  typically. 
 there are multiple taxonomic hypotheses of the  species concept in the literature. . The genus Physarum, with more than 140  species accepted and more than 500 proposals of names to be analyzed, may  serve as an example. 
Widely used software, such as databases, word proces- sors, or spreadsheets allows handling of large volumes of data quickly and  efficiently. . l All taxonomies are hypotheses and change as research progresses. .  but trac- ing how a particular name or classification evolved is often difficult and  can lead to ambiguities as to what concept was being referred to at any  particular time. . The concept of the genus Badhamia or Lamproderma are  two examples of this complexity. 
Programs that reveal the evolution and  analyze chronological changes or consult via Internet digital images of her- barium labels and type material are other tools that could be developed by  e-taxonomy. . l Taxonomy is basically a descriptive science, but in the descriptions of spe- cies the authors do not always use the same terminology or use terms in  the same sense. 
Sometimes, terms are inaccurately used and in some cases  contain a high dose of subjectivity. . The result is that the descriptions in these  cases are not easy to interpret and are ambiguous, thereby creating uncer- tainty regarding the concept of the species. 
Programs should be developed  240     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology to create standardization of terms. .  facilitating descriptions and comparison  of taxa. 
 and creating synoptic and dichotomous keys. . l In terms of nomenclature, the new technologies are also allowed. . The ICN  has introduced new rules to regulate the use of electronic documents. 
In Art   29   30   where it treats the conditions that must be met for the effective pub- lication of a new taxon. .  the ICN already accepts and regulates. 
 from January  1. .  2012   the use and distribution of electronic material in Portable Document  Format (PDF). .  facilitating the use of online publications. . Also, in Art. 
42,  established as mandatory, to register in a recognized repository (the www. . mycobank.org is recommended) all names of new taxa. 
 new combinations. .   names at new ranks. 
 or replacement names of fungi published on or after  January 1. .  2013   as well as the citation in the prologue of the identifier issued. 
l Finally, it is often difficult for nontaxonomists to contribute to the taxonomic  research program, although they sometimes have valuable observations and  material to add. . Fortunately, current research projects are more open and  available to all people through web pages, Internet forums, social networks  and other participatory media. . The rapid and unstoppable development of the computer and Internet of the  last 2 decades has allowed a creation of an arsenal of new technological tools. .   designed to streamline and make more precise the work of the taxonomist of our  century. . There is even a proposal to try to create a single web-medium. 
 called  “unitary taxonomy” (Scoble. .  2004)   that would serve as a “one-stop shop. 
” pro- viding all the resources that a taxonomist needs for work on a particular group  beyond the physical specimens themselves. . It would also provide an interface  to allow nonspecialists not only to gain access to information about a particular  group but also to enable them to contribute information. 
 such as new records. .   new images. .  and new evidences in their life cycle (e.g.. .  plasmodial color). 
It  would increase the number of users of taxonomy. . Some researchers. .  teams   projects   and governments are developing initia- tives or programs at different levels to solve the problems raised earlier in this  chapter. .  some of which are discussed in the following sections. 
Virtual Libraries and Herbaria These new generation libraries have produced a revolution in this matter and are  a clear example of the impact of new technologies in our daily work. . By access- ing these tools the user can consult many old books for no higher cost than a fee  for connecting to the Internet and a few seconds spent in the search. 
Prominent  examples are The Biodiversity Heritage Library (www.biodiversitylibrary.org). .   which specializes in old books; the Digital Library (http://bibdigital.rjb.csic.es). 
  developed by the Royal Botanic Garden of Madrid. .  which currently offers an  open access to more than 1.6 million pages and more than 2900 titles of botani- cal books; and Gallica (http://gallica.bnf.fr) or Europeana (www.europeana.eu). .   more generalistic initiatives that offer free access to old periodicals. .  manuscripts. 
  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    241 maps. .  images   and rare books. 
Many reference works for taxonomists, such as  the Taxonomic Literature (TL) (http://www.sil.si.edu/DigitalCollections/tl-2/ index.cfm), the Botanico Periodicum Huntianum (BPH) (http://fmhibd.library. . cmu.edu/HIBD-DB/bpho/findrecords.php), or the Index Herbariorum (http:// sweetgum.nybg.org/science/ih/), are also available on the web. . A virtual herbarium is a herbarium in digitalized form and can serve as a  very useful tool for studying details of the labels or parts of the specimen with- out touching the latter. 
 thus avoiding possible deterioration of the sample. . Most  important taxonomic institutions have ongoing programs of digitalization of  their collections, with special attention to type material. . Information about the  programs, formats, and digitalized collections is available on the websites of the  respective institutions. 
Repositories of Biodiversity Information Countries or groups of countries along with important institutions have seen the  importance of these technological opportunities. .  and support several e-taxono- my initiatives designed to provide large volumes of information on the biodi- versity of a region. 
 country   continent or worldwide. . The Global Biodiversity  Information Facility (GBIF) (www.gbif.org) is a good example. . GBIF is an  international governmental initiative that enables free and open access to biodi- versity data online. . One can explore species, countries, or datasets and obtain,  with only a click, large amounts of information. 
This includes nomenclatural  information. .  where the type or authentic specimens are deposited. 
 total number  of collections available. .  a representation on a map of the records deposited in  offical herbaria or collections. .  and the institutions that provide the information. 
 This international and cooperative initiative provides information of more than  1.6 million species and more than 649 million occurrences of organisms around  the world. . Another similar initiative is the ITIS (Integrated Taxonomic Informa- tion Systems), which provides information from North America (United States,  Canada, and Mexico). . GBIF and ITIS are also partners of other e-taxonomy  initiatives. 
 such as Species 2000 (www.sp2000.org). .  which provides access to  species names and associated data through distributed databases compiled by  specialists. .  the Catalogue of Life (CoL) (www.catalogueoflife.org). .  a single in- tegrated species checklist and taxonomic hierarchy. 
 or the Encyclopedia of Life  (EoL) (www.eol.org). .  a global access to knowledge about life on Earth. 
Projects Given the magnitude of the problems addressed in e-taxonomy, several collab- orative projects have been developed in recent years. . One is EU BON (European  Biodiversity Observation Network) (http://eubon.eu). 
This complex project. .  in  which 31 partners from 18 countries are involved. .  has among its objectives the  establishment and adoption of new data standards and integration techniques. 
  242     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology and harmonized data collections. . The Virtual Biodiversity Research and Access  Network for Taxonomy (ViBRANT) is a project funded by the European Union  FP7 and running from December 2010 to 2013 to support the development of  virtual research communities involved in biodiversity science. . The goal is to  provide a more integrated and effective framework for biodiversity data that  has often been generated by taxonomists. . ViBRANT provides a virtual research  environment (Scratchpads). 
 analytical services for users to build identification  keys and phylogenetic trees. .  a publication platform for users to automatically  compile biodiversity science manuscripts from their research database. .  a portal  for users to publicly accessible biodiversity research information and literature. 
  and training. .  helping research communities to use these tools and services. . The  Distributed European School of Taxonomy (DEST) (www.taxonomytrain- ing.eu), which is using the Scratchpads biodiversity online platform (scratch- pads.eu), is another project. . The TDWG Taxonomic Database Working Group  (TDWG) is one of the most active groups and their mission is the development  of standards and guidelines for the recording and exchange of biological and  biodiversity data. 
Some of their more common botanical standards are “Authors  of Plant Names. . ” “World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distribu- tion. 
” “Index Herbariorum. . ” or “Structured Descriptive Data.” The Biodiver- sity Virtual e-Laboratory (BioVeL Project) (http://www.biovel.eu) supports  scientists to carry out research on biodiversity by offering computerized tools  (workflows) to process large amounts of data. .  as well as tools for designing and  running workflows. 
LIFEWATCH (http://www.lifewatch.eu) is another Euro- pean project to provide E-Science European Infrastructure for Biodiversity and  Ecosystem Research, and places emphasis on environmental issues. . Banks of Data Another extremely useful tool is represented by the databanks, which act as  global taxonomic data repositories. 
Among them are MycoBank (http://www. . mycobank.org) and Index Fungorum (http://www.indexfungorum.org). .  two on- line databases designed as a service by documenting mycological nomenclatural  novelties (new names and combinations) and associated data. 
 such as descrip- tions. .  illustrations. 
 and status of the names. . Also   NomenMyx (www.eumyce- tozoa.com). .  a database specifically dedicated to myxomycetes and related or- ganisms (protostelids and dictyostelids). .  provides nomenclatural information on  more than 4600 names employed in this group. 
Additionally. .  for old literature. .   it can be consulted for a pdf of the original pages in which the species were  described as “new.” To demonstrate the impact of these banks of data. 
 in a year  and a half almost 50. . 000 pages have been consulted on NomenMyx. .  which is a  specialized web page. 
 and more than 7. . 300 individuals from all over the world  have visited this site. 
GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/), another  good example, is a genetic sequence database and an annotated collection of all  publicly available DNA sequences. . GenBank also provides information about  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    243 genomes. .  metagenomes. .  revision history of a sequence. 
 as well as many other  databases and tools with the idea of offering the most up to date and comprehen- sive DNA sequence information. . Morphobank (http://www.morphobank.org) is  a web application with tools and archives for evolutionary research. .  specifically  systematics. 
 and is a project designed to build the Tree of Life with phenotypes. . Virtual Encyclopedias Two of the more general initiatives in the whole web of life are the Encyclopedia  of Life’ (EoL) (www.eol.org) and “Discover Life” (www.discoverlife.org). . EoL  is a web page for every species. .  with information on classification. 
 nomenclature. .   taxonomy. .  references. .  images   but also with IUCN red list status. .  molecular biol- ogy and genetics. 
 maps   and comments. . It is linked to other initiatives previously  mentioned, such as Species 2000, ITIS, Catalogue of Life or GBIF, and compiles  much of the information provided by these other specialized web pages. . Dis- cover Life is in the same line as EoL and has as its mission to assemble and share  knowledge in order to improve education. 
 health   agriculture. .  economic develop- ment. .  and conservation throughout the world. . This makes the work of taxono- mists, which is often silent and anonymous, more visible and useful to society. 
Web Pages Web pages are single, usually hypertext documents, suitable for the World  Wide Web and identified by a unique URL (Uniform Resource Locator). . This  document can incorporate text, images, sounds, videos, links to other web pag- es, and endless possibilities that the mainstream media are not able to offer. 
Due  to its versatility, the web pages have been chosen as a means of dissemination  of many research projects to people interested in the myxomycetes. . As an ex- ample, the web page developed by the Eumycetozoan Project (http://slimemold. . uark.edu) could be mentioned. 
It is an excellent compilation of information  about “slime molds” assembled at the University of Arkansas in the context of  grants from the Planetary Biodiversity Inventories (PBI) and Partnerships for  Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy (PEET) programs of the National Science  Foundation of the United States. . On this web page. .  we can find educational  materials about myxomycetes. .  as well as databases. 
 a species image gallery. .  and  reports of the expeditions made by the different members of the team in many  parts of the world. 
This is probably the most complete web page dedicated to  myxomycetes. . Another important web page is MYXOTROPIC (www.myxo- tropic.org). 
 produced at the Real Jardín Botánico (CSIC) of Madrid. .  which  shows the results of this project that has as its objective the study of the myxo- mycetes in the Neotropics. 
 one of the richest biogeographic zones of the planet. .   with many biodiversity hotspots. 
On this web page. .  with versions in English  and Spanish. 
 information about the project can be found. .  such as a brief history  of the project. 
 its objectives. .  research areas. 
 digital images of species. .  pdfs of  244     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology publications of the team and a data portal with extensive information on the  distribution of these organisms in this biogeographical region. . This makes this  web page to be the most complete source of information on the myxomycetes  of a particular region of the world, in this case the Neotropics. 
Other web pages. .   some developed by people interested in the myxomycetes. .  with complementary  information about myxomycetes (videos. .  digital images of high quality. 
 and bi- ological information) are http://www.myxomycetes.net. .  http://myxo.be. .  http:// henkeikin.org. .  http://greekmyxomycetes.blogspot.com.es. .  http://hiddenforest. . co.nz/slime, http://mushroomobserver.org/species_list/show_species_list/728,  http://www.myx.dk, http://www.physarumplus.org, http://bioweb.uwlax.edu/ bio203/2010/renner_brad/index.htm. 
Software Bioinformatics is a discipline that has been very actively developed in recent  years. . Among its tasks is the development of software to formalize and stream- line many of the tasks of taxonomists. . Many of these software tools are free. 
  offer excellent performance. .  and do a number of different things. 
 such as to cre- ate automatically descriptions or keys to species (DELTA). .  to measure or com- pare structures (ImageJ. 
 SigmaScan. .  Scion Image). 
 to align or compare DNA  sequences (BLAST). .  to produce. .  manipulate. 
 or stack digital images (Photo- shop. .  CombineZP. .  Helicon focus). 
 to georeference localities of sampling and  GIS (Google Earth. .  GDAL   DIVA-GIS) to elaborate distribution maps of the  species (DIVA-GIS. .  ArcGIS)   or to correlate climatic parameters with envi- ronmental requirements of species (Maxent). . Many of these programs or tools  have been designed by taxonomists themselves or by specialized engineers in  bioinformatics in close cooperation with taxonomists. 
Also, one should not for- get computer search engines (like Google) that enable us to track all kinds of  information, from the most general to the most specific. . Finding information on  a scientific name on the network is no longer a problem. . As already presented. 
 the applications of information technology are numer- ous and varied. .  from the accessibility of information to the development of stan- dardizing terminology. .  standardizing descriptions. .  producing taxon description  “kits. . ” automatic key updates. 
 morphological repositories. .  galleries of images. .   and graphics tools. . The use of these tools seeks greater efficiency in the work  of taxonomists. 
 and new terms. .  such as e-taxonomy. .  web-taxonomy. .  cybertax- onomy. 
 or bioinformatics are increasingly being used by those individuals who  use or develop these new tools. . CHALLENGES IN TAXONOMY The taxonomist of today can work at orders of magnitude faster, thanks  to more efficient and collaborative modes of work. . Governments and in- stitutions are aware of the challenges and support programs or projects to  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    245 improve infrastructure. 
 to develop new tools. .  to implement new applica- tions. 
 ultimately. .  to launch new ideas and new objectives. . As Wheeler (2008)  reminds us. .  “Against formidable odds and with minimal funding. 
 equip- ment. .  infrastructure. .  organization and encouragement. 
 taxonomist have dis- covered. .  described and classified nearly 1.8 million species.” Hobern et al. 
 (2012) in their Global Biodiversity Informatics Outlook (GIBO) document  identified four major focal areas of work in the digital age. .  and offered a  framework for reaching a much deeper understanding of the world’s bio- diversity. 
Collaborative networks seem to be the fastest and most effective  way to further develop the current taxonomy. . Each day more taxonomists  are attracted by the possibilities that e-taxonomy offers to work in one of the  oldest branches of biology. . The challenges that arise are many and exciting. 
 Some of them are: l To complete the digitalization of all the published literature on myxomyce- tes from 1753. . l To digitalize records associated with specimens in collections, herbaria, and  fungaria. . l To produce a website containing a modern treatment of a taxonomic group. . l To create a consensus taxonomy without loss of alternative taxonomic hy- potheses. . l To ascertain that the taxonomic content on the web is produced by taxono- mists, corrected and up to date. 
l To explore new tools using bioinformatic specialists. . l To enable e-taxonomy to link to other initiatives, such as global catalogues,  the web of life initiative, bar-coding and other molecular sites, as well as to  specimen-level databases. . l To work within the current relevant taxonomic codes, while exploring  the practicalities and implications of taxonomic publication on the  Internet. . l To store basic taxonomic data in such a way that it can be used by scientists  and end-users. . These are just a few examples but can serve as encouragement to continue  working on this intriguing group of organisms. . This is a proposition of enor- mous audacity but one in which all taxonomists, researchers, and people inter- ested in myxomycetes can contribute with their individual grain of sand. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Carlos Lado thanks the Spanish Government grant CGL2014-52584P for economic support of  the research. . Uno Eliasson thanks the Royal Society of Arts and Sciences in Gothenburg for  economic support of fieldwork and other research related work on myxomycetes in Sweden  and abroad during several years. . Both authors thank Carlos de Mier for his technical assis- tance with the images and micrographs. . 246     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology REFERENCES Adl. 
 S M    Simpson   A G B    Lane   C E    Lukes   J    Bass   D    Bowser   S S    Brown   M W    Burki    F    Dunthorn   M    Hampl   V    Heiss   A    Hoppenrath. .  M    Lara   E    Le Gall   L    Lynn   D H     McManus   H    Mitchell   E A    Mozley-Stanridge. .  S E    Parfrey   L W    Pawlowski. 
 J    Rueckert    S    Shadwick   L    Schoch   C L    Smirnov   A    Spiegel   F W    2012  The revised classification of  eukaryotes. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  59 (5), 429–493. 
 Alexopoulos, C.J., 1973. . Myxomycetes. . In: Ainsworth, G.C., Sparrow, F.K., Sussman, A.S. 
(Eds.),  The Fungi: An Advanced Treatise. . Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. . 39–60   Alexopoulos, C.J., 1978. . The evolution of the taxonomy of the myxomycetes. 
In: Subramanian,  C.V. . (Ed.), In: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Taxonomy of Fungi Part I. .  University of Madras, pp. . 1–8   Batsch, A.J.G.C., 1783–1789. 
Elenchus Fungorum. . In: Gebauer, J.J., (Ed.), Halle. . Blackwell, M., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1975. 
Taxonomic studies in the Myxomycetes IV: Protophysa- rum phloiogenum, a new genus and species of Physaraceae. . Mycologia 67, 32–37. .  Brefeld, O., 1869. 
Dictyostelium mucoroides: Ein neuer Organismus aus der Verwandschaft der  Myxomyceten. . Abhandlungen der Senckenbergischen Naturforschenden Gesellschaft Frank- furt 7, 85–107. .  Castillo, A., Illana, C., Moreno, G., 1998. 
Protophysarum phloiogenum and a new family in the  Physarales. . Mycol  Res  102 (7), 838–842. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 1998. 
A revised six-kingdom system of life. . Biol  Rev  Camb  Philos  Soc  73,  203–266. .  Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Early evolution of eukaryote feeding modes, cell structural diversity, and  classification of the protozoan phyla Loukozoa, Sulcozoa, and Choanozoa. . Eur  J  Protistol  49  (2), 115–178. .  Clark, J., 1996. . Mating systems of Myxomycetes. 
ICSEM2 Abstract volume: 41. . Real Jardín Bo- tánico, CSIC, Madrid Clark, J., Haskins, E., 2002. . Reproductive systems of Comatricha laxa and Lamproderma arcyrio- nema. 
ICSEM4 Abstract volume: 15. . National Botanic Garden of Belgium, Meisse. . Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2014. 
Sporophore morphology and development in the myxomycetes: a  review. . Mycosphere 5, 153–170. .  Clark, J., El Hage, N., Stephenson, S.L., 1999. . Biosystematics of Didymium squamulosum. 
ICSEM3  Abstract volume: 66. . USADA-ARS National Fungus Collection (BPI), Beltsville, Maryland. . Clark, J., Haskins, E., Stephenson, S.L., 2002a. . Biosystematics of Badhamia gracilis. 
ICSEM4  Abstract volume: 16. . National Botanic Garden of Belgium, Meisse. . Clark, J., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2002b. 
Biosystematics of Arcyria cinerea. . ICSEM4  Abstract volume: 17. . National Botanic Garden of Belgium, Meisse. . Cooke, M.C., 1877. . The myxomycetes of the United States. . Ann  Lye  Nat  Hist  N  Y  11, 378–409. .  Corda, A.K.J., 1842. . Icones Fungorum hucusque cognitorum, vol. 
5  Apud J G  Calve, Pragae. .  David, J.C., 2002. 
A preliminary catalogue of the names of fungi above the rank of order. . Constan- cea 83, 1–30. .  de Bary, A., 1858. 
Ueber die Myxomyceten. . Bot  Ztg  16, 357–358, 361–364, 365–369. 
 de Bary, A., 1859. . Die Mycetozoen: Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der niedersten Thiere. . Z  Wiss  Zool   10, 88–175. .  de Bary, A., 1864. 
Die Mycetozoen (Schleimpilze): Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der niedersten Organ- ismen. . Verlag Von Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig. .  de Bary, A., 1884. . Vergleichende Morphologie und Biologie der Pilze, Mycetozoen, und Bacterien. 
 Verlag Von Wilhelm Engelman, Leipzig. .  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    247 de Schweinitz, L.D., 1822. . Synopsis fungorum Carolinae superioris secundum observationes  Ludovici Davidis de Schweinitz. 
Schriften der Naturforschenden Gesellschaft zu Leipzig 1,  20–131. .  de Schweinitz, L.D., 1832. . Synopsis fungorum in America boreali media degentium: secundum  observations. 
Trans  Am  Philos  Soc  4, 141–316. .  Domke, W., 1952. . Der erste sichere Fund eines Myxomyceten im Baltischen Bernstein (Stemonitis  splendens Rost. 
fa  succini fa. . nov  foss )  Mitt  Geol  Staatsinst. . Hamburg 21, 154–161. .  Dörfelt, H., Schmidt, A.R., 2006. 
An archaic slime mould in Baltic amber. . Palaeontology 49 (5),  1013–1017. 
 Dörfelt, H., Schmidt, A.R., Ullmann, P., Wunderlich, J., 2003. . The oldest fossil myxogastroid slime  mould. . Mycol  Res  107 (1), 123–126. .  Doweld, A.B., 2015. 
(2392) Proposal to conserve the name Physaraceae against Fuliginaceae  (myxomycetes). . Taxon 64 (6), 1313. .  Eliasson, U.H., 1977. . Recent advances in the taxonomy of myxomycetes. 
Bot  Not  130, 483–492. .  Eliasson, U.H., 2017. 
Review and remarks on current generic delimitations in the myxomycetes,  with special emphasis on Licea, Listerella, and Perichaena. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 343–350. .  Eliasson, U.H., Gilert, E., 1982. . A SEM-study of Listerella paradoxa (myxomycetes). 
Nord  J  Bot   2, 249–255. .  Eliasson, U.H., Keller, H.W., Schoknecht, J.D., 1991. 
Kelleromyxa, a new generic name for Licea  fimicola (myxomycetes). . Mycol  Res  95, 1201–1207. .  Eliasson, U.H., Sjögren, J., Castillo, A., Moreno, G., 2010. . Two species of the Stemonitales (myxo- mycetes) new to Sweden with remarks on generic delimitations. 
Boletín de la Sociedad Mico- lógica de Madrid 34, 147–154. .  Emoto, Y., 1977. 
The Myxomycetes of Japan. . Sangyo Tosho Publishing Co., Tokyo. .  Erastova, D.A., Okun, M.V., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2013. 
Phylo- genetic position of the enigmatic myxomycete genus Kelleromyxa revealed by SSU rDNA se- quences. . Mycol  Prog  12, 599–608. .  Estrada-Torres, A., Gaither, T.W., Miller, D.L., Lado, C., Keller, H.W., 2005. 
The myxomycete  genus Schenella: morphological and DNA sequence evidence for synonymy with the gastero- mycete genus Pyrenogaster. . Mycologia 97, 139–149. .  Farr, M.L., 1976. . Myxomycetes. 
In: Rogerson, C.T. . (Ed.), Flora Neotropica Monograph 16. . New  York Botanical Garden, New York, NY, pp. . 1–305   Farr, M.L., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1977. 
Validation of subclass Ceratiomyxomycetida and order Cera- tiomyxales (class myxomycetes). . Mycotaxon 6 (2), 213–214. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Berney, C., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. 
Higher-order phylogeny of  plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA  gene sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52 (3), 1–10. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Clissman, F., Meyer, M., Schnittler, R.M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Two-gene  phylogeny of bright-spored myxomycetes (slime moulds, Superorder Lucisporidia). . PLoS One  8, e62586. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Haskins, E.F., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2009. 
Semimorula liquescens  is a modified echinostelid myxomycete (Mycetozoa). . Mycologia 101, 773–776. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Fuku, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2012. .  18s rRNA phylogenics of Lamproderma and allied genera (Stemonitales, Myxomycetes,  Amoebozoa). 
PLoS One 7 (4), e35359. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Meyer, M., Baldauf, S.L., Pawlowski, J., 2008. 
Evolution of dark-spored  Myxomycetes (slime-molds): molecules versus morphology. . Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol  46,  878–889. 
 248     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelso, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., Baldauf, S., 2010. .  Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (Mycetozoa). . Protist 161, 55–70. 
 Fries, E.M., 1829. . Systema mycologicum, sistens fungorum ordines, genera et species. 
In: Mauritii E. .  (Ed.), Greifswald, vol. . 3  67–199  Gilbert, H.C., 1935. . Critical events in the life history of Ceratiomyxa. . Am  J  Bot  22, 52–74   Gilert, E., 1985. . Ultrastructure of Licea kleistobolus (myxomycetes) and its bearing on the taxo- nomic affinity of the species. . Nord  J  Bot  5, 99–104   Gilert, E., 1987. 
Morphology and ultrastructure of the plasmodiocarpous species Licea variabilis  and L. . retiformis (myxomycetes). 
Nord  J  Bot  7, 569–575. .  Gilert, E., 1990. 
On the identity of Perichaena liceoides (myxomycetes). . Mycol  Res  94, 698–704. .  Gilert, E., 1997. . Morphological and ultrastructural features in selected species of Licea (myxomy- cetes). 
Nord  J  Bot  16, 515–547. .  Hagelstein, R., 1944. . The Mycetozoa of North America, Published by the author, Mineola, NY. 
Härkönen, M., Sivonen, E., 2011. . Limasienet. . Botanical Museum, Finnish Museum of Natural His- tory, Helsinki. .  Haskins, E.F., Mcguinness, M.D., Berry, C.S., 1983. 
Semimorula: new genus with myxomycete and  protostelid affinities. . Mycologia 75, 153–158. .  Haskins, E.F., Wrigley de Basanata, D., 2008. 
Methods of agar culture of myxomycetes: an over- view. . Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 1–7   Hobern   D    Apostolico. .  A    Arnaud   E    Bello   J C    Canhos   D    Dubois   G    Field   D    García   E A     Hardisty. 
 A    Harrison   J    Heidorn   B    Krishtalka. .  L    Mata   E    Page   R    Parr   C    Price   J    Wil- loughby. 
 S    2012  Global Biodiversity Informatics Outlook. . Delivering biodiversity knowledge  in the information age. 
GBIF Secretariat. . Available from: http://www.gbif.org/resource/80859 Hochgesand, E., Gottsberger, G., 1989. 
Arcyriatella congregata, a new genus and new species of the  Trichiaceae (myxomycetes). . Nova Hedwigia 48, 485–489. .  Ing, B., 1999. 
The Myxomycetes of Britain and Ireland. . Richmond Publishing Co., Slough, UK. .  Jahn, E., 1928. . Myxomycetes (Mycetozoa, Phytosarcodina, Schleimpilze, Pilztiere). 
In: Engler,  A., Prantl, K. . (Eds.), Die natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien, Vol. . 2, Engelmann, Leipzig,   pp. . 304–339   Keller, H.W., 2012. 
Myxomycete history and taxonomy: highlights from the past, present, and fu- ture. . Mycotaxon 122, 369–387. .  Keller, H.W., Braun, K.L., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of Ohio: Their Systematics, Biology, and Use in  Teaching. . Ohio Biological Survey, Columbus, OH. .  Kowalski, D.T., 1966. 
New records of myxomycetes from California I. . Madroño 18 (5), 140–142. .  Kowalski, D.T., 1967. . New records of myxomycetes from California II. 
Madroño 19 (2), 43–46. .  Kowalski, D.T., 1973. 
New records of myxomycetes from California V. . Madroño 22 (2), 97–100. .  Kowalski, D.T., Curtis, D.H., 1968. 
New records of myxomycetes from California III. . Madroño  19 (7), 246–249. .  Kowalski, D.T., Curtis, D.H., 1970. 
New records of myxomycetes from California IV. . Madroño 20  (7), 377–381. .  Kretzschmar, M., Kuhnt, A., Bonkowski, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., 2016. 
Phylogeny of the highly  divergent Echinosteliales (Amoebozoa). . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  63, 453–459. 
 Krzemieniewska, H., 1960. . Sluzowce Polski na tle flory sluzowców Europejskich. . Polska Aka- demia nauk Instytut Botaniki, Warszawa. .  Lado, C., 2001. 
NOMENMYX  A nomenclatural taxabase of Myxomycetes. . Cuadernos de trabajo  de Flora micológica Ibérica 16, 1–221. .  Lado, C., 2005–2016. 
An online nomenclatural information system of Eumycetozoa. . Available  from: http://www.nomen.eumycetozoa.com Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    249 Lado, C., Eliasson, U., Stephenson, S.L., Estrada-Torres, A., Schnittler, M., 2005. . (1688–1691)  Proposals to conserve the names Amaurochaete against Lachnobolus, Ceratiomyxa against  Famintzinia, Cribraria Pers. . against Cribraria Schrad. 
ex J F  Gmel  and Hemitrichia against  Hyporhamma (myxomycetes). . Taxon 54 (2), 543–545. .  Lado, C., Pando, F., 1998. 
(1340) Proposal to conserve the name Reticularia (myxomycetes) with a  conserved type. . Taxon 47, 453–454. .  Lakhanpal, T.N., Mukerji, K.G., 1981. 
Taxonomy of the Indian Myxomycetes. . Bibliotheca Myco- logica 78, 1–531. .  Leers, J.D., 1789. 
Flora herbornensis exhibens plantas circa Herbornam Nassoviarum crescentes. .  Impensis C.F. . Himburgi, Berlin. .  Leontyev, D.V., 2015. 
The prospects and perspectives of the phylogenetic system of myxomycetes  (Myxogastrea). . Ukr  Bot  J  72 (2), 147–155. .  Leontyev, D.V., 2016. 
The evolution of sporophore in Reticulariaceae (myxomycetes). . Ukr  Bot  J   73 (2), 178–184. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Moreno, G., Stephenson, S.L., Mittchell, D.W., Rojas, C., 2014. 
 The genus Alwisia (myxomycetes) revalidated, with two species new to science. . Mycologia  106 (3), 936–948. .  Li, Y., Li, H.-Z., Wang, Q., Chen, S.-L., 2008a. 
Flora Fungorum Sinicorum. . Myxomycetes I: Cera- tiomyxales, Echinosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. 
Science Press, Beijing. .  Li, Y., Li, H.-Z., Wang, Q., Chen, S.-L., 2008b. 
Flora Fungorum Sinicorum. . Myxomycetes II. . Phy- sarales, Stemonitales. 
Science Press, Beijing. .  Link, J.H.F., 1833. . Handbuch zur Erkennung der nutzbarsten und am häufigsten vorkommenden  Gewächse 3, 405–422, 432–433, der Haude und Spenerschen Buchhandlung (S.J. . Joseephy),  Berlin. 
Linnaeus, C., 1753. . Species Plantarum. . Impensis Laurentii Salvii, Holmiae [Stockholm]. 
 Linnaeus, C., 1763. . Species Plantarum, second ed. . Impensis Direct, Laurentii Salvii, Holmiae  [Stockholm]. .  Lister, A., 1894. . A Monograph of the Mycetozoa. 
British Museum, London. .  Lister, A., 1911. 
A Monograph of the Mycetozoa, second ed. . British Museum, London, revised by  G. . Lister   Lister, G., 1916. 
The life-history of Mycetozoa, with special reference to Ceratiomyxa. . J  R  Mi- crosc  Soc  1916, 361–365. .  Lister, A., 1925. 
A Monograph of the Mycetozoa, third ed. . British Museum, London, revised by  G. . Lister   Macbride, T.H., 1899. . The North-American Slime-Moulds. 
Macmillan, London. .  Macbride, T.H., 1922. . The North-American Slime-Moulds, second ed. 
Macmillan, London. .  Macbride, T.H., Martin, G.W., 1934. . The Myxomycetes. 
Macmillan, New York, NY. .  Martin, G.W., 1949. 
Class Myxomycetes. . North American FloraNew York Botanical Garden, New  York, NY, 1. .  Martin, G.W., 1961. 
The systematic position of the Myxomycetes. . Mycologia 52, 119–129,  [1960]. .  Martin, G.W., 1966. 
The genera of myxomycetes. . Stud  Nat  Hist  Iowa Univ  20 (8), 3–32. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., Farr, M.L., 1983. 
The Genera of Myxomycetes. . University of  Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Massee, G., 1892. . A Monograph of the Myxogastres. 
Methuen & Company, London. .  McNeill   J    Barrie   F R    Buck   W R    Demouilin. .  V    Greuter   W    Hawksworth. .  D L    Herendeen. .   P S    Knapp   S    Marhold   K    Prado   J    Prud’Homme van Reine. 
 W F    Smith   G F    Wiersema    250     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology J.H.. 
 Turland   N J    2012  International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Mel- bourne Code). . Regnum Vegetabile, A.R.G. . Gantner Verlag KG, pp. . 154  Micheli, P.A., 1729. 
Nova plantarum genera iuxta Tournefortii methodum disposita. . Typis Bernardi  Paperinii, Florentiae. .  Moreno, G., Singer, H., Sánchez, A., Illana, C., 2004. . A critical study of some Stemonitales of North  American herbaria and comparison with European nivicolous collections. 
Bol  Soc  Micol  Ma- drid 28, 21–41. .  Morgan, A.P., 1893a. . The myxomycetes of the Miami Valley, Ohio I. 
J  Cincinnati Soc. . Nat  Hist   15, 127–143. .  Morgan, A.P., 1893b. . The myxomycetes of the Miami Valley, Ohio II. 
J  Cincinnati Soc. . Nat  Hist   16, 13–36. .  Morgan, A.P., 1894. . The myxomycetes of the Miami Valley, Ohio III. 
J  Cincinnati Soc. . Nat  Hist   16, 127–156. .  Morgan, A.P., 1896. . The myxomycetes of the Miami Valley, Ohio IV. 
J  Cincinnati Soc. . Nat  Hist   18, 36–45. .  Morgan, A.P., 1900. . The myxomycetes of the Miami Valley, Ohio V. 
J  Cincinnati Soc. . Nat  Hist   19, 147–166. .  Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1967. 
Notes on myxomycetes. . XII  A revision of the Stemonitales. 
 Proc  Kon  Ned  Akad  Wet  Ser  C 70 (2), 201–216. .  Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1974. 
De Nederlandse Myxomyceten. . Biblioth  Kon  Nederl  Natu- urhist. . Ver  18, 1–440   Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1982. 
Notes on myxomycetes. . XXI  The use of polarized light as  an aid in the taxonomy of the Trichiales. 
Proc  Kon  Ned  Akad  Wet  Ser  C 85 (4), 541–562. .  Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1985. 
Notes on myxomycetes XXII. . Three new species, two new  families and four new combinations. 
Proc  Kon  Ned  Akad  Wet  Ser  C 88 (1), 121–128. .  Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1991. 
A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes. . Biopress Ltd., Bristol. .  Nelson, R.K., Scheetz, R.W., 1975. . Swarm cell ultrastructure in Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. 
Mycolo- gia 67, 733–740. .  Nelson, R.K., Scheetz, R.W., 1976. 
Thread phase ultrastructure in Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. . Myco- logia 68, 144–150. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1993–2000. 
Die Myxomyceten Deutschlands und des  angrenzenden Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs. . 3 vols  Karlheinz  Baumann Verlag, Gomaringen. . Novozhilov, Y.K., 1993. 
Definitorium Fungorum Rossiae. . Divisio Myxomycota. . Fasc  1  Classis  Myxomycetes. 
Institutum Botanicum nomine V.L. . Komarovii, Petropolis. . Nauka  Novozhilov, Y.K., Mitchell, D.W., Schnittler, M., 2003. 
Myxomycete biodiversity of the Colorado  Plateau. . Mycol  Prog  2 (4), 243–258. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2000. 
A new coprophilous species of Perichaena (Myxomycetes)  from the Russian Artic (the Taimyr Peninsula and the Cruckchi Penninsula). . Karstenia 40,  117–122. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., van Hooff, H., Jagers, M., 2015. 
Trichioides iridescens, a new genus and new  species of the Trichiaceae (myxomycetes). . Mycol  Prog  14 (1018), 2–7. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2008. 
Two new species  of Perichaena (Myxomycetes) from arid areas of Russia and Kazakhstan. . Mycologia 100,  816–822. .  Olive, L.S., 1970. 
The Mycetozoa: a revised classification. . Bot  Rev  36, 59–89   Olive, L.S., 1975. . The Mycetozoans. 
Academic Press, New York, NY. .  Olive, L.S., Stoianovitch, C., 1966. . A new two-spored species of Cavostelium (Protostelida). 
My- cologia 58, 440–451. .  Taxonomy and Systematics  Chapter | 7    251 Panckow, T., 1654. . Herbarium Portatile. 
In verlegung de Historis, Berlin. . Persoon, P.H., 1794. 
Neuer Versuch einer systematischen Eintheilung der Schwämme. . Neues Mag   Bot  1, 63–128   Poulain, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. 
Les Myxomycètes. . 2 vols  Fédération mycologique et  botanique Dauphiné-Savoie, Sevrier. . Ride, W.D.L., 1999. 
International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN), fourth ed. . The Inter- national Trust for Zoological Nomenclature. . Natural History Museum, London. .  Ross, I.K., 1973. 
The Stemonitomycetidae, a new subclass of myxomycetes. . Mycologia 65 (2),  477–484. .  Rostafiński, J., 1873. . Versuch eines Systems der Mycetozoen. 
Inaugural-dissertation, Strassburg. .  Rostafiński, J., 1874. 
Śluzowce (Mycetozoa) Monografia. . Pamietn  Towarz  Nauk  Sci  Paryzu 5,  1–215. .  Rostafiński, J., 1875. 
Śluzowce (Mycetozoa) Monografia. . Pamietn  Towarz  Nauk  Sci  Paryzu 6,  216–432. .  Rostafiński, J., 1876. . Śluzowce (Mycetozoa) Monografia. 
Pamietn  Dodatek  Towarz  Nauk  Sci  8, 1–43   Ruggiero, M.A., Gordon, D.P., Orrell, T.M., Bailly, N., Bourgoin, T., Brusca, R.C., Cavalier-Smith,  T., Guiry, M.D., Kirk, P.M., 2015. . A higher level classification of all living organisms. 
PLoS  One 10 (6), e0130114. .  Scheetz, R.W., 1972. 
The ultrastructure of Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. . Mycologia 64 (1), 38–53. 
 Scheetz, R.W., Nelson, R.K., Carlson, E.C., 1980. . Scanning electron microscopy of Ceratiomyxa  fruticulosa. 
Can  J  Bot  58, 392–400. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y., 2000. . Ultrastructural studies of Barbeyella minu- tissima (myxomycetes). 
Karstenia 40, 159–166. .  Schrader, H.A., 1797. 
Nova Genera Plantarum. . Pars prima, Lipsiae. .  Scoble, M.J., 2004. 
Networks and their role in e-taxonomy. . In: Wheeler, Q.D. . (Ed.), The New Tax- onomy. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp. . 19–30   Schoknecht, J.D., Keller, H.W., 1989. 
Peridial calcification in the Myxomycetes. . In: Crick, R.E. .  (Ed.), Origin, Evolution, and Modern Aspects of Biomineralization in Plants and Animals. 
Ple- num Press, New York, pp. . 455–488   Shadwick, L.L., Spiegel, F.W., Shadwick, J.D.L., Brown, M.W., Silberman, J.D., 2009. 
Eumyceto- zoa = Amoebozoa?: SSUrDNA phylogeny of protosteloid slime molds and its significance for  the Amoebozoan supergroup. . PLoS One 4, e6754. .  Shchepin, O., Novozhilov, Y., Schnittler, M., 2014. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes in agar culture: some  results and open problems. . Protistology 8 (2), 53–61. .  Stephenson, S.L., 2003. 
Fungi of New Zealand. . Myxomycetes of New Zealand, vol. . 3  Fungal  Diversity Press, Hong Kong. 
 van Tieghem, P. . van, 1880  Sur quelques Myxomycètes a plasmodes agrégé. . Bull  Soc  Bot  France  27, 317–322. .  Walker, L.M., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. 
The species problem in Myxomycetes revisited. . Protist 167,  329–338. .  Wallroth, C.W.F., 1831–1833. 
Flora cryptogamica Germaniae, 2 parts. . Norimbergae. 
Wheeler, Q.D., 2008. . The New Taxonomy. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. .  Winter, G., 1880. . Die Pilze Deutschlands, Oesterreichs und der Schweiz I. . Abtheilung: Schizomyc- eten, Saccharomyceten und Basidiomyceten. . Rabenh  Krypt -Fl  ed  2, 1(1)  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., 2005. 
A taxonomic evaluation of the stipitate Licea species. .  Fungal Divers. 
20, 261–314. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., García-Martín, J.M., Estrada-Torres, A., 2015. 
Didymium xe- rophilum, a new myxomycete from the tropical Andes. . Mycologia 107 (1), 157–168. .  Yamamoto, Y., 1998. . The Myxomycete Biota of Japan. . Toyo Shorin Publishing Co., Tokyo. 
 Page left intentionally blank 253 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00008-1 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 8 Ecology and Distribution  of Myxomycetes Yuri K. . Novozhilov*, Adam W. . Rollins**, Martin Schnittler† *Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, St. 
Petersburg. .  Russia;  **Lincoln Memorial University. .  Harrogate. 
 TN   United States; †Institute of Botany and Landscape  Ecology. .  Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald. .  Greifswald. 
 Germany INTRODUCTION General patterns of community structure for terrestrial macroorganisms (plants. .   animals   and macrofungi) are relatively well known. . However   similar informa- tion on microorganisms remains rather fragmentary and has been limited. .  to a  large extent. 
 by methodical difficulties relating to carrying out inventories due  to their small size. .  their high reproductive productivity and dispersal capac- ity. .  overall abundance. 
 and certain unique aspects of the life cycles. .  such as  extremely resistant resting stages and the presence of both sexual or asexu- al life cycles. . Fortunately. 
 the mathematical methods of community ecology. .   developed to analyze and compare diversity. 
 species abundance patterns and  interactions between organisms and their physical. .  chemical   and biological  environments (Jongman et al.. 
 1995; Krebs. .  1999; Magurran. 
 2004) are ame- nable to studies involving the fruiting bodies produced by myxomycetes. . Synecological studies of assemblages of myxomycetes were rare and rath- er general in nature until the 1980s, when the first relatively comprehensive  ecological studies were carried out. . These included studies of the myxomyce- tes associated with tropical vegetation types in Brazil (Maimoni-Rodella and  Gottsberger. .  1980) and the upland forests of southwestern Virginia in the United  States (Stephenson. .  1988)  Further studies focused as well on the autecology of  myxomycetes. 
 analyzing the occurrence of fruiting bodies in relation to envi- ronmental gradients. .  including the first studies of niche breadth and niche over- lap (Rojas et al.. .  2008; Schnittler. 
 2001a)  In contrast to the sometimes clearly  visible fruiting bodies. .  the trophic stages of myxomycetes are microscopic and/ or have a rather hidden life style; therefore. .  our knowledge of the ecological  requirements of amoeboflagellates and plasmodia and their trophic interac- tions is still limited (Eliasson. 
 1977b; Madelin. .  1984a; Shchepin et al.. .  2014;  Sunhede. 
 1973)  254     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The current species concept for myxomycetes is based almost entirely  upon morphological features of the fruiting bodies and their spores. .  which  allow identification to the species level (Lister and Lister. 
 1925; Martin and  Alexopoulos. .  1969; Schnittler and Mitchell. .  2000; Schnittler et al.. .  2012;  Stephenson. 
 2011)  Since trophic stages of myxomycetes (amoeboflagellates  and plasmodia) display little or no meaningful taxonomic characters. .  studies  of fruiting bodies from field collections or moist chamber cultures is usually  the only way to tell species apart. . Fruiting bodies can be collected, air-dried,  and preserved in much the same manner as regular herbarium specimens of  other groups of organisms, such as vascular plants, bryophytes, and macrofungi. .  Fruiting bodies or colonies of fruiting bodies provide a basic unit to estimate  species richness and species abundance because they are extractable, identifi- able, and quantifiable. . In contrast to most other groups within the Amoebozoa,  these features allow researchers to accumulate data on occurrence, ecology, and  geography of myxomycetes. . Examples of such data can be accessed by using  such web sites as http://slimemold.uark.edu/ or http://www.gbif.org/ Approximately 60% of all morphospecies can be detected in the field with  the naked eye or a simple hand lens. . The corticolous species with minute fruit- ing bodies (e.g.. 
 species of Licea or Echinostelium) can reliably be detected only  in the laboratory using the moist chamber culture technique and examination of  substrate samples under a dissecting microscope. . Only a very few species like  Echinostelium bisporum require agar culture techniques and the use of a com- pound microscope. .  similar to the techniques developed for protosteloid amoebae  (Schnittler et al.. .  2015b; Spiegel et al.. 
 2004)  It has been hypothesized that some  species of myxomycetes do not form fruiting bodies and can be detected only by  metagenomic analysis of environmental DNA (for a description of the first stud- ies of this kind. .  see Clissmann et al.. .  2015; Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2016; Hoppe and  Schnittler. .  2015; Kamono et al.. 
 2013)  If these methods become more widely  available and barcoding approaches. .  such as the first study of Feng and Schnittler  (2017) become more common. 
 this will result in databases that allow a reliable  assignment of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) in relation to existing species. .  This would result in a tremendous expansion of our knowledge of myxomycete  ecology. . Until recently, ecological studies of myxomycetes were limited by the  necessity to detect and identify fruiting bodies. . This limitation must be kept in  mind when examining methodological approaches and reports on the current  state of knowledge about myxomycete ecology, which is the task of this chapter. 
METHODS OF STUDY Field Surveys Field-based surveys of myxomycetes must be planned to account for seasonal  and environmental variation across the study area being considered to avoid  artifacts associated with phenological variation in sporulation activity. . In the  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    255 tropics, field surveys appear to be most productive during the rainy season. 
 Tran et al. . (2006) examined fruiting phenology across 5 study sites in northern  Thailand and recovered 62 species during the rainy season but only 2 species  during the dry season. . In contrast. 
 productivity in broadleaf deciduous forests  in eastern North America seems to peak around August (Stephenson. .  1988); in  temperate Europe. .  the peak shifts toward autumn or late autumn (Schnittler and  Novozhilov. .  1998)  High-latitude sites appear to be most productive during the  narrow window associated with the growing season. . Completely different is the  phenology of nivicolous myxomycetes, with a peak fruiting period during the  time of spring snow melt (Ronikier and Ronikier, 2009; Schnittler et al., 2015a). 
For wood-inhabiting species. .  an intense survey conducted during the peak  season (under typical conditions) can produce a representative species list of  the most common taxa for a particular area. .  if all major microhabitats are sys- tematically investigated. 
An experienced collector usually can locate 50–70 col- lections during a typical 6-h field day in a forested area in the temperate or  boreal zone. . As such, an intensive survey of approximately 12–16 days can  produce a fairly complete species list in these zones. . However, tropical areas  require a much greater sampling effort. . For example. 
 a project carried out by  the senior author in southern Vietnam required three surveys over as many  years (representing 276 h of collecting) to produce a fairly complete species list  (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)  Field surveys in arid regions are not very effective. 
In contrast, especially  for winter-cold deserts lacking succulent plants, moist chambers are very pro- ductive. . Almost all specimens found in the winter-cold deserts and steppes of  Kazakhstan (Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  2000)   western Mongolia (Novozhi- lov and Schnittler. .  2008)   the Lower Volga River basin of Russia (Novozhilov  et al.. .  2006) and the Tarim Basin in China (Schnittler et al.. .  2013) were obtained  from moist chamber cultures. 
Annual shifts in species abundance have been documented for many spe- cies. . This is exemplified by data from the monsoon tropical forests of southern  Vietnam where. .  in spite of comparable field efforts during visits across 3 years in  the same season. 
 the abundance of myxomycete fruiting bodies varied consider- ably (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)  Abundance of the fruiting bodies of nivicolous  myxomycetes in alpine and subalpine vegetation has also been documented to  be extremely variable between years. .  ranging from nearly zero to hundreds of  colonies (Schnittler et al.. .  2015a)  For this reason, at least two independent field  surveys separated in time are necessary to ensure the recording of all phenologi- cal groups. 
Various designs and placement of study plots have been used for myxomy- cetes. . The plots can be arranged systematically along transects or collecting can  be carried in completely randomized plots. . Opportunistic collecting without the  use of plots has been used in some studies. . A survey of the literature reveals that  the number of transects and plots has varied widely across different studies. . For  example. .  Stephenson (1988). 
 in a study of myxomycete ecology carried out in  256     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology upland forest communities in southwestern Virginia. .  used 0.1 ha (20 × 50 m)  permanent plots established within each of five different forest types. . Each plot  was (1) representative of the particular forest community with respect to both  vegetation and site conditions. .  (2) consisted of a relatively homogenous unit of  vegetation located in an area of essentially uniform topography. .  and (3) there  was no evidence of appreciable recent disturbance by man or other causes. 
 Rollins and Stephenson (2013), when surveying grasslands across the central  United States, used two transects, which were established at each study site. .  Five samples were collected from each predetermined available microhabitat  at approximately 5 m intervals along each transect. . In the Maquipucuna Cloud  Forest Reserve in Ecuador (Stephenson et al., 2004a), substrate samples for  moist chamber cultures were collected along a transect ca. 
200 m in length,  which was established in each study area. . Within a distance of 10 m, several  substrate pieces of one type were collected and pooled to produce a sample  of approximately 15–25 g weight. . Sampling was repeated along the transect  to obtain a series of substrate samples of each type. 
Schnittler (2001b). .  in his  study of myxomycetes associated with liverworts in the Neotropics. .  collected  substrate samples over a distance of approximately 10 m along a transect of  200–250 m in length and 6 m in width. 
Novozhilov et al. . (2013b), in a survey of nivicolous myxomycetes in the  northwestern Caucasus Mountains, used a design consisting of 18 circular  plots of ca. . 50 m diameter arranged along an elevational transect, which were  revisited for 4 years (Schnittler et al., 2015a). . Every year the whole transect  was examined for several days and every myxomycete fruiting was recorded,  including those in a weathered or severely decayed condition. 
Rojas and Doss  (2014). .  in ecological study of myxomycetes in Costa Rica. .  used four transects  running south to north that were established perpendicular to the sharp eco- tone between forested and nonforested patches in the study area and placed  100 m from each other. . Along each transect, four circular plots 10 m in radius  were established every 50 m. . Two of these study points were located inside  the forested habitat zones, one at the forest border, and one in the nonforested  (pasture) habitat. . Moist Chamber Cultures The moist chamber culture technique. .  first described by Gilbert and Martin  (1933). .  can supplement the information obtained from collecting specimens  that have fruited in the field under natural conditions and thus represents  a major source of data for diversity studies in myxomycetes (Eliasson and  Lundqvist. 
 1979; Härkönen. .  1977   1978; Härkönen and Ukkola. .  2000;  Stephenson. .  1985; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2002)  First of all, this technique  allows a better detection of species with minute fruiting bodies via the use  of a dissecting microscope. . Moreover, it helps to overcome biases that result  from the sporadic and ephemeral nature of myxomycete fruiting. . However, the  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    257 technique itself has an inherent bias since it favors species with short develop- mental cycles and small fruiting bodies. . Species with large compound fruiting  bodies (e.g., species in the genera Tubifera or Lycogala) appear much more  rarely in moist chambers than in the field. . Nevertheless. 
 the moist chamber cul- ture technique is especially helpful to study ecological groups with very small  fruiting bodies. .  such as corticolous (those species associated the bark surface of  living trees) or coprophilous (fimicolous) myxomycetes (those species associ- ated with the weathered dung of herbivorous animals). .  where fruiting bodies  are rarely encountered in the field. 
The use of moist chamber cultures is par- ticularly important for supplementing surveys in extreme environments. .  such  as arid habitats. .  high-elevation montane sites. .  and high-latitude regions where  fruiting bodies rarely develop under natural conditions. 
The moist chamber culture technique is both simple to use and effective,  requiring only Petri dishes, filter paper, and a good dissecting microscope. . The  technique does not require sterile conditions and can easily be modified to suit  the researcher’s situation. 
For example, if filter paper is not available, toilet pa- per works as well, and if Petri dishes are not available, they can be replaced by  plastic containers (like those used for food products). . For comparable results,  the modifications should account (as best as possible) for the water holding  capacity of the paper and the amount of substrate material placed in each con- tainer. . Substrate samples are collected in the field and placed in small paper  bags, transported to the laboratory, and allowed to air-dry. . Typically, 1–10 g of dry substrate material is placed in each of a series of  100 × 15 mm plastic Petri dishes in which the bottom has been lined with filter  paper. . Water is added to submerge the substrate material. .  which is then allowed  to soak for approximately 24 h. .  at which time the pH of the supernatant is deter- mined with a flat-plate electrode and the excess water is decanted. 
A dissecting  microscope is used to monitor the cultures for the occurrence of myxomycete  fruiting bodies. . The monitoring schedule and total duration varies among pub- lished studies but cultures are generally maintained for 2–3 months under dif- fuse daylight at room temperature (typically 22–23°C). . When myxomycete fruiting bodies are observed, they are collected and pre- served in the same manner as field specimens. . A small piece of the substrate  containing mature fruiting bodies is glued to a paper tray, which is placed into  a small pasteboard box. . Fruiting bodies of minute species are immediately pre- served in polyvinyl lactophenol or glycerol gelatine when calcareous structures  are present. 
The occurrence of one or more fruiting bodies of one species con- sidered to have developed from a single plasmodium is recorded as one collec- tion. . Optionally, for statistical evaluations, the number of fruiting bodies in a  moist chamber culture may be estimated. . Traditionally. 
 the moist chamber culture technique has been used to examine  the species associated with the microhabitats represented by (1) forest floor lit- ter. .  including leaf litter. .  twigs   decaying conifer cones. .  seeds and fruits; (2) the  bark surface of living trees and shrubs; and (3) various types of woody debris. 
 258     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology However. 
 as ecological studies of myxomycetes have increased across the trop- ics. .  in arid areas. .  and in high-latitude regions. 
 this set of substrates has been  expanded to include a number of additional microhabitats. .  including aerial litter  (dead but still attached plant parts above the ground). 
 inflorescences of large  tropical giant herbs (especially members of the family Heliconiaceae; Schnittler  and Stephenson. .  2002)   the litter of fleshy herbaceous plant parts. .  such as shoots  and leaves of Musa sp. . and Colocasia sp. . (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2017a)   living leaves  of understory plants with a cover of leafy liverworts present (Schnittler. .  2001b)    the bark of lianas (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2008)   the litter of forbs (non- grass broadleaf plants) and grasses (Rollins and Stephenson. .  2013)   the litter  of succulent plants (Estrada-Torres et al.. 
 2009) and weathered dung of her- bivorous mammals (e.g.. .  camels   cows   horses   sheep   reindeer   moose   and  various rodents) and birds. .  such as grouse (Eliasson and Keller. 
 1999)   and soil  (Stephenson et al.. .  2011)  Examples of many of these microhabitats are illus- trated in Figs. . 8.1 and 8.2. 
Despite its importance, the moist chamber technique does have some limita- tions. . Since the technique creates nonnatural conditions. 
 such as a long-lasting  period of moisture. .  it may produce records of species from dormant stages that  would not or very rarely have formed fruiting bodies under natural conditions. . In  addition. 
 the limited amount of resources available in these microcosms does not  appear to be sufficient for species with large compound fruiting bodies. .  since the  latter rarely appear under such circumstances. . Perhaps, for similar reasons lig- nicolous myxomycetes that are often abundant on coarse wood debris in the field  rarely appear in moist chamber cultures. . For example. 
 in studies across southern  Vietnam (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a) and the Russian Far East (Novozhilov  et al.. .  2017b)   the ratio of records of Hemitrichia serpula from the field and in  moist chamber cultures were 10:1 and 63:0. 
 respectively. . Although this kind of  bias cannot be ruled out. 
 comparisons of results obtained from moist chamber  cultures and field surveys in intensively studied areas have not revealed such large  discrepancies. . Most species were found both in the field and in moist chamber  cultures, but most were much more commonly recorded from one or the other. . Another limitation of the moist chamber culture technique is that it can be  time intensive, especially when trying to quantify the number of fruiting bodies  and searching for minute species. 
Myxomycetes. .  which produce minute fruiting  bodies. .  account for almost one third of all described taxa among the cortico- lous myxomycetes and are not always easily detected even with a dissecting  microscope (Mitchell. 
 1977   1978)  Even if the magnification of an excellent  instrument potentially allows the detection of nearly every fruiting body. .  the  field of view becomes very small and screening the whole surface of a Petri dish  (about 60 cm2 for standard dishes of 9 cm diameter) can be laborious. 
There- fore, the smallest myxomycetes such as Echinostelium bisporum (two-spored  fruiting bodies of 18–25 µm total height) or E. . lunatum (4–8 spores) usually  escape detection by this method and can be recovered only in agar cultures if  these are examined with a compound microscope. 
Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    259 FIGURE 8.1 Microhabitats for myxomycetes. . (A) Opuntia sp., a specific microhabitat for suc- culenticolous myxomycetes in deserts. 
(B) Weathered dung of herbivorous animals. . (C) Coarse  woody debris of a conifer in a taiga forest. . (D) Accumulation of leaf litter in a broadleaf deciduous  forest. 
(E) Mosses in forest-tundra covered by immature fruiting bodies of Fuligo muscorum. . (F)  Colony of fruiting bodies of Colloderma robustum on a single patch of the liverowort Mylia taylorii  (Hook.) Gray. . 260     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology FIGURE 8.2 Additional microhabitats for myxomycetes. 
(A) David Mitchell collecting speci- mens of the bark of a juniper for use in moist chamber cultures. . (B) Bark of lianas. 
(C) Decaying  floral parts of Heliconia sp., which provide a microhabitat for myxomycetes. . (D) Aerial litter of a  bird’s nest fern (Asplenium nidus s.l.) in a lowland monsoon forest of southern Vietnam. 
Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    261 Agar Cultures The use of agar cultures represents the classic approach for the physiological  and autecological studies of myxomycetes. . The first spore-to-spore cultures  of myxomycetes were reported by Lister (1901). 
At present. .  only about 100  myxomycete morphospecies (about 10% of morphospecies known worldwide)  have been cultured from spore-to-spore on agar media (Haskins and Wrigley de  Basanta. .  2008; Liu et al.. .  2010)  The method has numerous variations, but in  general spores collected from mature fruiting bodies are sown on 0.75% water  agar at pH 7.0. . Parafilm is used to seal the Petri dishes, which are kept at room  temperature (20–23°C) in diffuse light. 
Upon germination, amoeboflagellates  are transferred to water agar (ranging from 1.5% to 5%), then to carrot agar  (Indira, 1968) or to SM agar (1.5% agar on SM broth; Kerr and Sussman, 1958). .  Bacteria incidentally sown along with the spores serve as a food source. . Crushed  autoclave-sterilized oat flakes can also be used as an additional food source for  plasmodia. 
Although the percentage of positive cultures is lower when compared to  moist chamber cultures. .  the agar culture method can be extremely effective  for detecting minute myxomycetes (Schnittler et al.. .  2015b) and protostelids  (Spiegel et al.. .  2004)   due to the relatively weak. 
 resource-poor agar that keeps  competing fungal growth at a minimum. . However, myxomycetes with larger  fruiting bodies and/or colonies are usually absent in these cultures or develop  only a few fruiting bodies. . Pieces of the substrate used in agar cultures need to be small (e.g.. .   1 × 2–4 mm) and comparatively tall (1–2 mm). .  since only the outline of myxo- mycetes can be detected with the use of a compound microscope. 
In addition,  it is useful to arrange a fixed number of pieces in a line to assist the observer  in maintaining orientation while checking the cultures. . For example, Schnittler  et al. 
(2015b) used 4–6 substrate pieces in 4 lines, giving a total of 120–200 mm  outline to scan for the presence of myxomycetes. . A modification of this method  was recently used to examine the trophic stages of myxomycetes present in  wood. 
 utilizing half-strength corn meal agar overlaid with a dilute suspension of  bacteria (Aerobacter sp.) and 2.0 mL of sterile water (Taylor et al.. .  2015)  This  study revealed the presence of the amoeboflagellates of myxomycetes in 47% of  the wood slivers examined but found no evidence of plasmodia. . Agar cultures also appear to represent a promising method to study the  myxomycetes associated with soil (Indira, 1968; Stephenson et al., 2011;  Warcup, 1950). 
A modified version of the “Cavender method” (Cavender and  Raper. .  1965) has been used in many culture-based studies that have attempted  to characterize and quantify myxomycete occurrence in the soil microhabitat  (Feest. 
 1985   1987; Kerr. .  1994; Stephenson and Landolt. 
 1996)  Feest and  Madelin (1985) used culture plates prepared with half-strength corn meal agar  inoculated with a suspension of washed cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. . These  studies commonly count plasmodium-forming units (PFUs), thus quantifying  262     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology the occurrence of all groups of soil mycetozoans. 
It should be noted. .  however    that this method probably produces an underestimation (possibly several fold). 
  since for sexual myxomycetes two cells are required to form a plasmodium. .   plasmodia can fuse. 
 and most species cannot be isolated using culture-based  methods. . This approach also introduces a bias toward members of the Physara- les, which are more readily grown in culture. 
Metacommunity Analysis In contrast to all other detection techniques, this is the only approach that is  able to detect the trophic stages of myxomycetes. . A study exclusively focus- ing on actively living protists in soil. .  employing a transcriptomic approach  (RNA) revealed the Amoebozoa as one of the major terrestrial protist groups. 
  with myxomycetes accounting for 25% of all ribotypes in the soil sample. .  thus  representing the single largest component of total protozoan soil biodiversity  (Urich et al.. 
 2008)  Comparatively easier to carry out are studies targeting the  more stable DNA, although dormant stages (such as inactive spores) will be  detected as well. . Primer specificity is crucial; in a metagenomics study in which  universal primers targeting the whole SSU were used (Lesaulnier et al., 2008),  myxomycetes were absent from the investigated soils. . This discrepancy is  likely the result of the high divergence of SSU rDNA sequences in both size  and sequence in different species of myxomycetes (Fiore-Donno et al., 2010). .  Even primers known to be nearly universal for the Amoebozoa often do not  amplify myxomycetes (Cavalier-Smith et al., 2015). . In addition, the SSU gene  contains a large number of introns of varying lengths, which may take up to  70% of the sequence (Feng and Schnittler, 2015; Feng et al., 2016; Wikmark  et al., 2007a,b). . Given this situation. 
 considerable effort has focused on the  design of appropriate primers. .  in particular for DNA barcoding of species  of myxomycetes (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2005   2010   2013; Martin et al.. .  2003;  Novozhilov et al.. .  2013b; Schnittler et al.. .  2017)  Even with the appropriate  primers. .  sequences resulting from PCR of environmental samples can be as- signed to species only by comparison with sequences coming directly from  fruiting bodies (Feng and Schnittler. 
 2017)  Not surprisingly. .  the first studies  employing ePCR (Clissmann et al.. .  2015; Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2016; Kamono  et al.. 
 2013) revealed a significant proportion of unknown sequences; these are  clearly of myxomycete origin but do not cluster with sequences of known spe- cies. . This proportion of “hidden diversity” continues to pose a serious meth- odological problem. 
 and further research is needed to show to what extent  the presence of these sequences can be explained by (1) technical errors (for  instance. .  chimera formation). .  (2) lack of comparison sequences from fruiting  bodies. .  or (3) or that they belonging to yet truly undiscovered taxa (possibly  amoebal strains that have lost the ability to fruit without consequences for veg- etative reproduction). . This raises as well the question of the threshold for the  assignment of sequences to OTUs. 
 which may be derived from an analysis of  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    263 existing sequences from fruiting bodies. . A systematic barcoding approach is  highly desirable, since for many morphospecies we do not yet have a sequence  for even a single marker gene. 
Data Evaluation for Diversity Studies in Myxomycetes At the level of amoebal populations, at least the numbers of individual amoe- bae can be estimated. . Until the publication of a method for the enumeration of  myxomycetes in soil (Feest. 
 1987; Feest and Madelin. .  1985; Madelin. 
 1990)    no data on the numbers of myxomycete propagules in any substrate had been  reported. . In their papers. .  Feest and Madelin (1985) showed it was possible to  obtain numerical data for soil using a unit (the plasmodium-forming unit. .  PFU)  analogous to the clone-forming unit of dictyostelids used by Cavender and  Kawabe (1989). . Based on the ability to form plasmodia. 
 which distinguishes  myxomycete amoeboflagellates apart from free-living amoebae in soil. .  Feest  and Madelin (1985) used the presence or absence of plasmodia as an unambigu- ous indicator of the presence of myxomycetes in a particular substrate. . As such,  this method permits us to estimate a total abundance of myxomycetes in soil  but is time-consuming. . Since amoeboflagellates or plasmodia usually cannot be  determined to the species level, this approach does not work for estimating the  abundance of separate species. . As such   virtually all data on myxomycete diversity is derived from fruiting  body-based surveys. 
 where fruiting bodies can be used as an abundance unit  because they can be collected. .  identified to species and quantified. 
The great  advantage of this approach is the simple way to collect specimens. . Colonies  of fruiting bodies simply can be dried, glued along with the substrate in small  boxes, such as matchboxes and stored in the same manner as other types of her- barium specimens. . Eliasson (1981) and Stephenson (1988) considered a “col- lection” as one or more colonies of fruiting bodies that originated from a single  plasmodium. . In these studies, colonies of fruiting bodies were regarded as sepa- rate collections if they were separated by a distance of at least 30 cm. 
With such  approaches, we can apply the methods of community ecology, used in diversity  studies of various groups of organisms, as well as for myxomycetes. . However,  one central term is difficult to define for myxomycetes—the individual as the  basic unit to count abundances (Novozhilov et al., 2000). . Two kinds of data  have been widely used in diversity studies of myxomycetes. . These are presence/ absence data, leading to checklists, and abundance data, based on the number of  records for a particular species (Schnittler, 2001a). 
For the latter approach. .  usu- ally one or several colonies of fruiting bodies developing on the same piece of  substrate is regarded as an “individual. . ” taking into account that (1) plasmodia  can fuse or separate into pieces and (2) that a piece of a phanero- or aphanoplas- modium usually segregates into a colony of several gregarious fruiting bodies. 
Most commonly used is the second approach. .  which involves expressing  species abundance as the number of records (colonies of fruiting bodies assumed  264     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology to have developed independently from each other). 
Stephenson et al. . (1993) in- troduced a simple scale (often abbreviated ACOR). .  based on the proportion of  a species in the total number of records with R: rare (<0.5%); O: occasional  (0.5%–1.5%); C: common (1.5%–3%); and A: abundant (>3%). . This scale is  widely used in many modern studies of myxomycetes and permits comparison  of different data sets if roughly the same approach (method of collecting. .  selec- tion of substrates for moist chamber cultures. 
 etc.) has been used. . Since many species of myxomycetes produce compound fruiting bodies in  which individual fruiting bodies are still apparent. .  a third approach (in addition  to presence/absence of species and counting numbers of collections per spe- cies) would be appropriate for diversity studies—the number of fruiting bodies  (or fruiting body-equivalents) per species. 
Considered from an ecological point  of view, myxomycete fruiting bodies are not actively living stages but instead  serve solely as spore dispensers. . Therefore, estimating spore numbers per spe- cies is probably the most accurate measure of abundance. . This approach was  proposed to measure the spore numbers for species cultivated in moist chamber  cultures by Schnittler (2001a). 
In this approach. .  the number of spores per fruit- ing body was estimated for each species. .  using average fruiting body size and  shape (e.g.. 
 half-globose. .  globose   and cylindrical) to calculate fruiting body  volume. .  and spore diameters when assuming the densest package of spheres. .  The dimension of these values was confirmed by counting the spore numbers of  a few selected fruiting bodies with a counting chamber (as used for determina- tion of erythrocyte levels). 
However, this method is too laborious for large-scale  applications and has not been used for subsequent studies. . The most popular abundance estimation is the number of records per species;  for studies with a moist chamber culture component. .  the occurrence of one spe- cies in one moist chamber culture constitutes a collection (record). 
Less com- monly used is weighted abundance. .  calculated by dividing the absolute number  of fruiting bodies recorded in a particular moist chamber/colony by the mean  value from all moist chambers with this species present (Schnittler. .  2001a; Ste- phenson et al.. 
 2004a)  Consequently, the sum of all weighted abundances for  all cultures with a species is equal to the number of records for this species. . This  approach can help to determine substrate preferences for a particular species. 
For diversity studies, a number of standards are now used by most research- ers. . These are that (1) common and easily recognizable species are sometimes  only recorded instead of being collected. .  whereas for rare and not easily recog- nizable species every colony of fruiting bodies will be preserved as a herbarium  specimen to verify determinations; (2) the genus Ceratiomyxa is included due  to its ecological equivalence to the true myxomycetes; (3) all fruiting bodies  which share the same substrate and are clustered together (and thus are likely  to have developed from one plasmodium) are recognized as one colony and  are registered as one record; (4) specimens have to be identified to the lowest  possible taxonomic level according to standard monographs (Martin and Alexo- poulos. .  1969) and various original descriptions from the literature. 
 utilizing a  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    265 morphospecies concept; and (5) nomenclature used for species follows the stan- dard list of Lado (2005–16). . Many studies have shown that the diversity of myxomycetes in a particular  vegetation type can be determined only if all major substrate types are sam- pled for moist chamber cultures. 
 and records from moist chamber and from  the field often complement each other (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a; Schnittler  et al.. 
 2002)  This is especially important in arid ecosystems, where most to  nearly all species could be detected only in moist chamber cultures (Novozhilov  and Schnittler, 2008; Schnittler and Novozhilov, 2000). . If abundances of species are recorded. .  then individual-based species accumu- lation curves (SAC) based on the Hulbert formula can also be constructed using  programs like EstimateS version 9.0 (Colwell. .  2013)   the Vegan package of R  (Oksanen et al.. .  2016) or SPADE (Chao et al.. 
 2016); nonparametric estimators  for expected species richness could also be calculated (Chao et al.. .  2006)  Most  commonly used are the Chao1 (for abundance data) or the Chao2 (for replicated  incidence data) estimators (Gotelli and Colwell, 2011). . As a second approach. 
 the  SAC can be fitted with a hyperbolic function y = ax/(b + x). .  where x is the num- ber of samples. .  y represents the number of species recorded. .  and the parameter a  refers to the maximum number of species to be expected (Unterseher et al.. .  2008)  To characterize assemblages of myxomycetes and to make comparisons  among assemblages. .  in addition to species richness (S). 
 evenness can be quan- tified and expressed with the respective indices (Magurran. .  2004)  Typically    assemblages of myxomycetes show low evenness values. .  since a few very com- mon species are accompanied by many rare ones. .  even if the sampling effort is  extensive (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2017a; Stephenson. .  1988)  The most often used  is the Shannon index H′ = –∑pi ln pi. .  where pi is the relative abundance (the  proportion of the total number of individuals or records represented by the ith  species) is a heterogeneity index. 
 influenced by both species richness and even- ness. . Often used to describe evenness of a community (as species’ dominance)  is Simpson’s dominance index  = ∑ D 1/ pi 2 (see the textbooks of Krebs, 1999;  Magurran, 2004 for details). . A simple indicator of overall taxonomic diversity  is the species per genus (S/G) ratio as described by Stephenson et al. . (1993)  Diversity comparisons between study sites (geographical regions. .  habitats    or substrates) can be carried out by calculating Fisher’s α. 
 Shannon H′. .  and the  first three numbers of Hill’s diversity series (Hill. .  1973; Morris et al.. .  2014)  In  addition. 
 a rank-abundance distribution (Whittaker. .  1965) of the species can be  constructed and the most probable abundance distribution model can be deter- mined by testing different models. 
 following Wilson (1991). . For example, these  include the null (fits the MacArthur broken stick model), preemption (fits the  geometric series or Motomura model), log-normal, Zipf, and Mandelbrot mod- els. . The goodness of fit is usually compared with a χ2 test, using the deviations  between the observed and expected number of species for the various classes. .  The Vegan package of R with the functions renyi and radfit, provides the neces- sary algorithms (Dagamac et al., 2017b). 
266     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology To compare species overlap between assemblages of myxomycetes from dif- ferent habitats or substrates. 
 the adjusted incidence-based index Chao-Sørensen  (Chao et al.. .  2006)   computed with EstimateS or the Vegan package of R. 
 can  be used. . To test if any two species occur more (association) or less (avoidance)  often together in samples (moist chamber cultures) than would be expected by  chance. 
 the Cole (Cole. .  1949) or Brave indices of interspecific association and  its standard errors can be computed (Novozhilov et al.. .  2006)  Both indices are  based on a 2 × 2 contingency table for presence and absence of a pair of spe- cies in one moist chamber culture. .  ranging from −1 (the species never occur  together in the same moist chamber) to 1 (the species always occur together in  the same moist chamber); significance can be tested by a χ2 test. 
In summary. .  the ideal (but time-consuming) approach for an all-taxon inven- tory of myxomycetes would consist of a field survey component. .  moist cham- bers cultures with substrate samples. .  agar cultures with discrete substrate pieces  for minute myxomycetes. 
 and additional metagenomic techniques. . Generating  databases for marker genes by the less error-prone Sanger sequencing of fruit- ing bodies is a precondition for reliable identification and interpretation of se- quences from environmental PCR. 
In addition, we need more knowledge about  the genetic, morphological and ecological diversity of the various morphospe- cies (Stephenson, 2011). . Microhabitat Descriptions Many ecological studies of myxomycetes focus on defining habitat and micro- habitat parameters to describe ecological niches. . Although myxomycete distri- bution is almost undoubtedly limited by macroclimate and habitat (especially  vegetation) requirements of particular species. .  there is strong evidence that mi- crohabitat availability is the factor acting most strongly on species distribution. 
 The term “microhabitat. . ” used herein sensu Stephenson (1988). .  refers to a small  section of a habitat that is spatially homogeneous in both biotic and abiotic fac- tors (e.g.. .  a section of the trunk of a shrub or small. .  shaded patches of litter with  relatively the same thickness and moisture level (Schnittler. 
 2001a)  Ordination techniques (multivariate statistics) are a valuable approach for  exploring and visualizing possible effects of micro- and macroenvironmen- tal variables. .  but the latter still need to be quantified. 
Often used methods  (Jongman et al.. .  1995; Oksanen et al.. 
 2016; Ter Braak. .  1987; ter Braak and  Verdonschot. 
 1995) include nonmetric multidimensional scaling ordination  (NMS). .  principal component analysis (PCA). 
 canonical correspondence analy- sis (CCA). .  and correspondence analysis (CA). . Rojas and Stephenson (2007)  used NMS with the program PC-ORD (McCune and Mefford. 
 2006)   Sørensen  distances and a Monte Carlo test in a study of myxomycetes in oak forests of  Cerro Bellavista in Costa Rica. . Various microenvironmental parameters, includ- ing pH, substrate moisture, and diameter, height above the ground and canopy  openness were recorded. 
PCA based on correlations also was performed with  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    267 the same set of data to evaluate the relative importance of the different variables  to the structure and composition of the assemblage of species present and to  evaluate similarities with the previous ordination. . CCA was carried out to assess  the relative importance of recorded environmental factors on the assemblages of  myxomycetes present in arid regions in Eurasia and in tropics (Novozhilov and  Schnittler. 
 2008; Schnittler. .  2001b)  CA was used to assess the distributional re- lationships and microhabitat preferences of quantitatively important species of  myxomycetes associated with the three types of temperate grasslands (tall grass. .   mixed grass. .  and short grass) found across the western central United States  (Rollins and Stephenson. .  2013)  A discriminant analysis ordination was carried  out to evaluate compositional differences in the assemblages that existed for  height (ground and aerial) and diameter (large and small) of lianas in northern  Thailand (Ko Ko et al.. 
 2010)  Dagamac et al. . (2017b) used Bray-Curtis dis- tances and PERMANOVA, which was performed to test for the influence of  region versus elevation, using the functions hclust, metaMDS, and adonis of R. . The output of all these methods depends largely on the way in which en- vironmental parameters are recorded. 
In his study of myxomycete ecology in  Kazakhstan deserts. .  Schnittler (2001a) successfully utilized a modular system  to describe microhabitat parameters. 
 which was subsequently adopted for use  in other studies (Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  2008; Novozhilov et al.. .  2006)  The  parameters included the type of substrate (e.g.. 
 bark   litter   wood   and weathered  dung of herbivorous animals). .  texture of the bark subdivided in five texture  groups according to its physical features and the type ground litter (leafy litter. 
  grass litter. .  and herbaceous litter). 
Environmental parameters included sampling  height above the ground, light intensity, wind exposure, water retention, and  pH of the substrate. . Light intensity was estimated using five categories rang- ing from complete darkness (e.g., under stones) over various degrees of shade  to full sunshine. . Wind exposure was described using a scale of four categories  reaching from fully sheltered to strongly exposed. 
To estimate the water re- tention of bark, sticks about 8 cm long were removed from the trunks of all  sampled species of shrubs. . Two or sometimes three sticks with typical bark  structure were collected within the diameter range used for substrate sampling. 
 Their ends were covered with nail polish to prevent water from soaking through  wood pores. . Sticks were dried, weighed, and then watered for 2 h, simulating  strong rainfall, and then weighed again. . The differences between dry and wet  weight and the diameter and length of the sticks were used to calculate water  retention in mL/dm2 bark surface. . In a study of the assemblages of myxomycetes associated with cloud forests  of the Maquipucuna Cloud Forest Reserve in the western Andes of Ecuador  (Schnittler et al.. 
 2002; Stephenson et al.. .  2004a)   all myxomycete substrates  were classified into seven categories. 
These were the bark of living trees and  shrubs; decaying. .  formerly solid wood in various stages of decay; decaying  woody but soft plant parts with a small diameter (e.g.. .  lianas and shoots of  climbing members of the family Araceae in tropics); decaying corolla parts  268     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology and bracts of inflorescences of giant herbs. .  with all samples obtained from liv- ing plants above ground; leafy litter. .  either aerial (dead but still attached plant  parts). .  or from the forest floor; litter of fleshy herbaceous plant parts. 
 such as  shoots of members of the family Heliconiaceae; and epiphyllic liverworts on  living. .  mostly leathery leaves of understory shrubs and trees. 
Schnittler et al. . (2010) recorded 14 environmental parameters. .  including mi- croclimatic parameters. 
 in a study of the ecology of a highly specialized assem- blage of ravine myxomycetes from sandstone gorges of the Saxonian Switzerland  region (Germany). . These parameters were (1) height of the myxomycete colony  above ground (where the soil starts. 
 precision 10 cm. .  range 0–80 m); (2) height  of the locality above the valley bottom (with the rivulet taken as baseline. .  preci- sion 0.5 m. .  range 0–80 m); (3) height of the rocks above the colony (all rocks not  covered by soil. 
 precision 0.5 m. .  range 0–80 m); (4) percent horizon opening. .   as seen with a fisheye lens (precision 1%. .  range 1%–100%); (5) exposition of  the rock surface (in degrees from North = 0 degrees. 
 precision 5 degrees. .  range  0–360 degrees); (6) inclination of the rock surface (using a ruler and a compass  with inclination scale. .  precision 2 degrees. 
 range 0–180 degrees); and (7) pH  (measured 3 times on three samples of bryophytes covered by myxomycetes  using an Orion 610 pH meter with a flat surface electrode. .  precision 0.05 units. .   range 2.5–4.5 units). . In the relevé areas (20 cm × 20 cm). 
 percent coverage was determined for  (8) the extent of the bryophyte-covered rock surface. .  (9) the extent of the algae- covered rock surface and (10) the extent of bare rock; and finally. .  and (11–14)  the coverage of the four most common bryophyte species (all precision 5%. .   range 0%–100%). 
A total of 127 small-scale vegetation relevés showed that the  assemblage occurs only in deep and narrow gorges (mean horizon openness  4.9%) on nearly vertical rocks (mean inclination 79°). .  and preferentially on  rocks with a northern exposure (42% of all relevés). . Climatic parameters are very important for nivicolous myxomycetes  (Schnittler et al., 2015a). . Data on temperature. .  snow cover. 
 and growth limits for  amoeboflatellates (Shchepin et al.. .  2014) indicate that nivicolous myxomycetes  appear to be abundant predators of below-snow microbial communities. 
Most  probably, microclimatic conditions rather than food shortages represent decisive  factors determining the abundance of fruiting bodies. . According to this study. 
  abundant fruitings can be expected if (1) the first sharp frosts in autumn (<−5°C)  occur after the first snowfalls. .  (2) a continuous snow cover persists until hard night  frosts cease in spring. .  and (3) snow packs reach a depth of at least 30 cm to shelter  the ground from hard winter frosts. .  ensuring a sufficiently long period of snow  melt providing the most suitable temperatures for growth of amoeboflagellates. 
Environmental Factors and Ecological Niche A major challenge for researchers is determining which factors can constrain  species distributions. . The main theoretical concept applied in such studies is  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    269 the ecological niche of species (Broennimann et al., 2012; Soberón, 2007). .  Historically, such studies of myxomycete ecology have focused primarily on  differences in microhabitats (Stephenson, 1988). . However   in spite of the long  history of such studies. 
 our knowledge about the ecological requirements of  species of myxomycetes remains very fragmentary. .  with only a few taxa stud- ied (Eliasson. .  1977a; Sunhede. 
 1973)  Currently, methods for quantifying the  environmental niche and estimating niche differences typically rely on ordina- tion techniques (Broennimann et al., 2012). . In myxomycete studies, the tradi- tional or classical approach has been to calculate values for niche breadth sensu  Whittaker et al. 
(1973) with the formula NB = 1/ Pij (Novozhilov et al., 2006;  Schnittler, 2001a; Stephenson, 1988, 1989). . The sum refers to the number of  states for the environmental parameter defining a niche dimension. .  with Pij as  the proportion of species i associated with state j divided by the total abundance  of species i across all states (Feinsinger et al.. .  1981)  Many measurements of  ecologically and evolutionarily relevant factors are possible at the species and  individual levels of organization in ecological studies of myxomycetes. 
The  main bias for all such studies is that at present only data on the occurrence of  fruiting bodies are available. . As abundance measures, numbers of records of  fruiting bodies or their total abundance are used. . Due to the difficulties in iden- tification and detection. 
 studies of how the trophic stages (amoeboflagellates  and plasmodia) vary in their requirements for and tolerances of these factors in  the field are lacking. . Ecological requirements for niche dimensions of species have been docu- mented in a study of myxomycetes in a winter-cold desert of western Kazakhstan  (Schnittler. .  2001a) and the Caspian lowland (Novozhilov et al.. .  2006)  The  parameters used as resource states were the type of substrate. 
 height above the  ground. .  light intensity. .  wind exposure. 
 substrate water retention. .  pH   the type  of bark texture. .  and the development time of fruiting bodies (the 5 observation  days for moist chamber cultures were 2. .  6   11   21   and 40)  The pH value, rang- ing from 4.5 to 8.5, was subdivided into classes of 0.5, whereas resource states  for the other parameters were defined as explained earlier. 
In the same manner. .   niche overlap was computed. 
 using the symmetrical index NOik =  PijPik/sqrt  ( Pij 2  Pik 2). .  with Pij and Pik as the proportions of the ith resource state by the  jth and kth species. 
 respectively (Colwell and Futuyma. .  1971; Levins. .  1968)   as  modified by Pianka (1973). 
Values for niche breadth and niche overlap range  from 0 to 1. . The ecology of the three morphospecies of Ceratiomyxa was studied by  Rojas et al. . (2008) to evaluate both direct and multivariable responses of the  species to their environment. . As such, microenvironmental parameters associ- ated with fruiting bodies were measured or determined directly in the field. 
 These including pH. .  substrate moisture. .  substrate type. .  diameter or thickness  of the substrate as an index of substrate mass. .  height above the ground. .  and  canopy openness as a way to evaluate light availability. . The first two parameters  were measured with a calibrated pH meter and an electronic moisture meter  270     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology when possible. 
 whereas the other parameters were determined as described in  Stephenson et al. . (2004a)  Light availability was assessed with a system utiliz- ing five discrete categories and which was transformed into a standard percent- age scale comparable to the readings obtained with the moisture meter. . The  categorical arrangement used for ecosystem types and forest subtypes was  considered part of the microenvironmental setting. . The study revealed a clear  separation of niches between the two tropical species, which was interpreted as  an indication of resource partitioning within the genus. . The cosmopolitan and  most variable Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa had the broadest niche of the three spe- cies. . Collectively. 
 the niche overlap value between Ceratiomyxa morchella and  Ceratiomyxa sphaerosperma. .  when considered in conjunction with the results  of multivariate CDA analysis. .  suggested that these two species are more spe- cialized than C. . fruticulosa. 
Acidity of Substrate (pH) Information available in the literature consistently indicates that substrate pH  may represent one of the most influential factors affecting myxomycete assem- blages. . As such, this parameter may be considered as one of the major drivers  of myxomycete distribution. 
Some species (e.g., Arcyria cinerea) are regularly  reported from substrates with a wide pH range, whereas others (e.g., Paradia- cheopsis fimbriata) seem to be restricted to narrower pH range. . Most of the  studies in which an effort has been made to access the influence of substrate  acidity on myxomycete distribution have been directed toward corticolous  species (Everhart et al.. 
 2008; Härkönen. .  1977; Härkönen and Vänskä. 
 2004;  Kilgore et al.. .  2009; Snell and Keller. 
 2003)  It is well known that low substrate pH appears to be a limiting factor for the  growth and development of many species of myxomycetes. . In general. .  decidu- ous trees characterized by moderately acidic bark display a more diverse assem- blage of corticolous myxomycetes than coniferous trees with highly acidic bark  (Ndiritu et al.. 
 2009; Snell and Keller. .  2003)  The results from an experiment  with simulated acid rain and the bark of Quercus petraea revealed a trend of  decreasing number of corticolous myxomycetes with decreasing pH (Wrigley  de Basanta. .  2004)  It was reported that the abundance of myxomycetes was af- fected by the constant acidification of the substrates; however, fewer individuals  within each species appeared at pH 3.0 and 4.0. . The author hypothesized that at  low pH values food resources may become very limited or no longer available. .  Novozhilov et al. 
(1999) reported that most species of myxomycetes encoun- tered in the Taimyr Peninsula appeared to have a relatively wide pH tolerance  but displayed different pH optima. . As a general observation, corticolous species seem to have a narrower pH  tolerance than wood-inhabiting species. . For example, Comatricha nigra was  collected 30 times on the bark of living Larix and Picea but only once on the  bark of Duschekia fruticosa, and P. . fimbriata was found only on Larix in a study  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    271 carried out by Novozhilov et al. . (1999)  It is likely that for many corticolous  members of the Physarales and Echinosteliales that are adapted to higher pH  values, this is a major limiting factor. . If so, this would be an explanation as to  why they are rare in boreal coniferous forests. 
In contrast. .  compared with the  results from surveys carried out in other geographic regions. .  the biota of myxo- mycetes encountered in deserts of Eurasia is rather poor but one of the most  distinctive (Novozhilov and Schnittler. 
 2008; Schnittler. .  2001a)  In addition to  obvious features. 
 such as absence of trees and succulent plants or the harsh. .   arid conditions. 
 the high (7.5–8.0) pH of almost all of the substrates available  appears to be a limiting factor (Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  2000; Stephenson  et al.. 
 2000)  The reasons seem to be the often salty soils and the actual plant  substrates, especially the abundant members of the Chenopodiaceae with high  Na+ and ash contents. . These high pH values may be a reason for the absence of  most members of the Stemonitales, Liceales, and Trichales except for the ge- nus Perichaena. . The only exception is represented by the bark of Tamarix (pH  4.6–7.2. .  n = 5)   which supports a different assemblage of myxomycetes (e.g.. 
  Comatricha laxa. .  Comatricha pulchella. .  Arcyria minuta. .  and Licea biforis). 
 The very basic pH, as recorded for most substrates by Novozhilov and Schnittler  (2008), probably accounts for the distinctive assemblage of myxomycetes found  in deserts. . Still higher pH values (8.7–10.4) were recorded from the dead pith  of cacti from the Sonoran Desert (Blackwell and Gilbertson, 1984). 
Humid re- gions. .  especially those with coniferous trees. 
 possess more substrates with low  pH values. .  as preferred by most members of the Stemonitales or certain species  of Licea (Stephenson. .  1989; Stephenson et al.. 
 2000)  Only one member of  the Stemonitales (Macbrideola oblonga) was common in deserts, and this was  the only member of this taxonomic order with an apparent optimum for higher  pH values. . Similarly, certain species of Perichaena are probably an exception  among the order Trichiales, where most of the species inhabit decaying wood  with low pH values. . Reports for Perichaena chrysosperma (Stephenson, 1989)  seem to fit this picture as is also the case for the records of P. . corticalis reported  in the study of Blackwell and Gilbertson (1980). 
In studies of the assemblages of myxomycetes associated with the inflores- cences of large Neotropical herbs. .  Schnittler and Stephenson (2002) reported  that at least two of the species (Physarum compressum and Ph. 
didermoides)  most commonly encountered preferred substrates with a very basic pH (8–9). .  Interestingly, both species are commonly found on the weathered dung of her- bivorous animals, which is also characterized by an alkaline pH (Novozhilov,  personal communication). 
The actual substrates for myxomycetes in inflores- cences are the rapidly decaying floral parts enclosed by the massive, still living  bracts. . It is likely that the residues of floral nectar or secretions from extraflo- ral nectaries provide the basic resource for a rapidly developing community  of yeasts and bacteria, as well as dung. . A high density of these organisms is  suggested by the frequent occurrence of myxobacteria in the moist chamber  cultures prepared with floral parts and dung. . 272     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology It is interesting to note that the assemblages of acidophilic corticolous spe- cies inhabiting the bark of conifers are clearly different between boreal and  tropical forests. . For example, the most common corticolous species on the bark  of Pinus sylvestris in the taiga is P. . fimbriata, whereas in the tropical montane  forests of Vietnam it is Cribraria confusa (Novozhilov et al., 2017a). 
It should be noted that almost all of the aforementioned studies focused on the  synecological and biogeographical aspects of myxomycete assemblages. . There  are very few autecological studies that have examined the influence of environ- mental factors on a single species. 
According to Rojas et al. . (2008), C  morchella  is strongly limited to decaying wood with a very acidic pH, a rather rare habitat  in tropical forests. . Without exception, the habitat of the more than 100 records  obtained for this species was the decorticated, moderately to strongly decayed  wood of large logs with pH values between 3.0 and 4.5. 
This precludes any con- fusion with C. . sphaerosperma, the second tropical species of the genus, which  inhabits exclusively substrates with a pH above 6.5 (up to 8), and most often is  found on the decaying shells or husks of fruits. . In the context of ecological and  distributional studies of Barbeyella minutissima (Schnittler et al., 2000), it was  shown that this species tends to be associated with the liverworts (Nowellia sp. .  and Cephalozia sp.), which often occur together as pioneer species on decorti- cated coniferous logs, with a pH optimum 4.6–5.2. . It has been suggested that  these bryophytes can well serve as indicator species for Barbeyella. 
Even species belonging to one genus can have different pH ranges. . For ex- ample, Licea minima is abundant on substrates with a pH of 4.0–5.0 (optimum  pH 4.3; Stephenson, 1989). . In contrast, Licea succulenticola occurs on succu- lent plants with a pH of 10.0 (Mosquera et al., 2003). 
In general. .  members of  the Physarales prefer neutral to basic substrates such plant litter. .  whereas most  members of the Trichiales and Cribrariales occur more commonly on acidic  bark and the coarse woody debris of conifers (pH usually 3.5–5.5). . Exceptions  prove this rule, since five species of Perichaena were commonly found on sub- strates with a relatively high pH (6.5–6.8) in the deserts of the Caspian Lowland  (Novozhilov et al., 2006). 
Several published studies that have analyzed the results obtained from moist  chamber cultures prepared with samples of ground litter and bark collected  across tropical and boreal forests but also including deserts. .  have demonstrated  a pattern of increasing species diversity with increasing pH values. . For both lit- ter and bark, a higher substrate pH tends to be positively correlated with higher  species diversity. 
Low substrate pH appears to be a limiting factor for growth  and development of most species of myxomycetes. .  which may simply result  from the fact that most bacteria do not grow well under these conditions. 
Microhabitats and Ecological Assemblages of Myxomycetes A detailed knowledge of the small-scale distribution of species of myxomy- cetes across different microhabitats (substrates) is essential for understanding  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    273 the composition of myxomycete assemblages and their functional roles in eco- systems. . Numerous published studies of myxomycete diversity across differ- ent substrates have demonstrated that species composition varies considerably  for different types of substrates (e.g.. 
 the bark of different species of trees). .  However, the set of species that is dominant for a certain sample of a particular  substrate is rather limited. . In most studies, substrate samples are typically char- acterized by one to four species, which comprise more than 30%–50% of the  assemblage present (potential dominants). . With the help of the moist chamber  technique (Gilbert and Martin. 
 1933) these dominants are revealed rather easily  and definitely. .  which provides an opportunity to carry out mass analyses and  produce statistically sound results. 
Utilization of moist chamber cultures per- mits one to evaluate α-diversity and abundance as “frequency of species” and  determine an assemblage of core species. .  especially for arid and high-latitude  regions with extreme climates. . Ground Litter Plant litter represents a major source of organic carbon in forest soils (Anichkin  and Tiunov, 2011; Berg et al., 2001). . The decomposition of plant litter is a com- plex process that involves mineralization and transformation of organic matter. .  Decomposition of plant litter is a key step in nutrient recycling. . As most of the  plant biomass-derived carbon in the forests is mineralized in the litter layer. .   an understanding of this process and the microorganisms involved is essential  for the identification of factors that affect global carbon fluxes (Vorˇíšková and  Baldrian. 
 2013)  As such, environmental heterogeneity and resource availability  within this context have been pointed out as essential factors strongly affecting  species richness (Yang et al., 2015). . The leaf litter microhabitat is heterogeneous and relatively complex. 
 both  chemically (containing various soluble substances. .  cellulose. .  and lignin) and  structurally (consisting of a mixture of different types of decaying plant detritus. .   such as leaves. .  fruits   flowers   seeds   bark fragments. .  and twigs). 
This micro- habitat is intimately associated with (and ultimately contributes to the formation  of) the soil. . Given its high level of heterogeneity, the leaf litter microhabitat  could conceivably be quite productive for soil myxomycetes. . More recently,  certain components of the leaf litter microhabitat, such as fruits (Novozhilov  et al., 2001, 2017a) and twigs (Stephenson et al., 2008), have been given some  attention. 
Furthermore. .  it is generally accepted. .  although very little quantita- tive data exist. .  that amoeboflagellates are normal and sometimes quite abundant  components of the soil microbiota and probably have a substantial role in nu- trient cycling and the detrital food chain (Stephenson et al.. .  2011; Urich et al.. 
  2008)  Other than a single paper by Stephenson and Landolt (1996), little infor- mation exists with respect to the distributional patterns of myxomycetes within  the leaf litter microhabitat. . Rollins and Stephenson (2012) reported that there  were inherent differences between different levels (or strata) of the forest floor  274     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology leaf litter microhabitat. . Each stratum was characterized by a distinct assemblage  of species; moreover, both species richness and abundance varied throughout. .  The leaf litter microhabitat represents a heterogeneous and understudied mi- crohabitat that can be very productive (at least in temperate forests) for myxo- mycetes. 
Even when species richness is relatively low for a given stratum, the  total number of collections can be appreciable. . A well-defined stratification of  assemblages of myxomycetes may represent the effects of competition and/or  other microenvironmental influences. . The highly decomposed A-1 stratum and  twigs are found to be exceptionally diverse for myxomycetes. 
The relatively  high diversity of the twig stratum is probably not surprising, since Stephenson  et al. . (2008) reported more than 40 species associated with twigs in a series of  studies carried out in many different localities around the world. 
It seems to be a general trend in the tropics for litter is more diverse for  myxomycetes than decaying wood and the bark of living trees (Schnittler and  Stephenson, 2000; Stephenson et al., 2004a). . Since fruiting bodies of many  litter-inhabiting myxomycetes are easy to overlook and quickly destroyed by  numerous predatory invertebrates. .  only field surveys carried out in combination  with the moist chamber culture technique are suitable to recover the diversity of  myxomycete assemblages. 
 especially for litter. . For example. 
 in lowland mon- soon forests of southern Vietnam (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)   in spite of a high  number of intensively studied plots. .  ground litter appeared poor in the field (22  species from 84 records. .  H′= 2 44   D = 6.88). .  compared to records obtained in  moist chamber cultures (47 species from 272 records. 
 H′= 3 33   D = 20.03). .  Samples from the leafy fraction of litter yielded more records and species than  those from all other fractions collectively. . In addition, moist chamber cultures  were more productive for the leafy fraction. 
Species inhabiting the ground lit- ter of herbaceous plants seem to be more specialized than myxomycetes which  prefer general leaf litter and twigs. . Despite the low plant biomass of arid regions, litter represents an important  microhabitat for myxomycetes. 
For example. .  in the steppe zone of Eurasia. .  the  intrazonal arboreal communities of the steppe and desert zones provide all of the  microhabitats for myxomycetes typically found in temperate forests (Novozhi- lov et al.. .  2006)  It is interesting to note that most of the rare species obtained in  the Caspian lowlands were collected in the field on woody debris and leaf litter  in the intrazonal arboreal habitats located in gullies and riparian forests. 
In these  areas, the conditions are rather similar to those in temperate deciduous forests. .  In grassland communities of North America. .  the greatest number of collections  of myxomycetes was obtained from microhabitats represented by forbs. 
 defined  as broadleaf herbaceous plants (Rollins and Stephenson. .  2013)  The greatest  species richness occurred in tall grasslands, whereas mixed grasslands and short  grasslands produced an equal number of species. . The difference in the numbers  of collections obtained from forb litter and grass litter was striking. .  whereas the  forb aerial litter and forb ground litter microhabitats were found to be the most  similar. 
Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    275 In desert regions. .  litter plays an important role as a microhabitat for myxo- mycetes (Blackwell and Gilbertson. 
 1984; Lado et al.. .  2002; Novozhilov  and Schnittler. .  2008; Schnittler. .  2001a; Schnittler and Novozhilov. 
 2000)  It  has been documented that plant litter mineralizes rather quickly in deserts  (Dobrovol’skaya et al.. .  1997) due to the high abundance of hydrolytic bacte- ria. .  which consequently represent a source of food for myxomycetes. 
However,  collectively ground litter was less productive than the bark of trees and in total  was characterized by lower values of diversity and species richness in deserts  than in forests. . Among the species recorded from litter in temperate deserts. .  the  dominant litter-inhabiting forms tend to be species of Badhamia. 
 Comatricha. .   Didymium. .  Echinostelium. .  Licea   Perichaena. 
 and Physarum (Novozhilov and  Schnittler. .  2008; Novozhilov et al.. .  2003   2010; Schnittler et al.. 
 2013)  Coarse Woody Debris For many organisms. .  coarse woody debris represents an important factor with  respect to their distribution (Davis et al.. 
 2010; Harmon et al.. .  2004; Nordén  et al.. .  2004; Ohlson et al.. .  1997; Samuelsson et al.. .  1994; Siitonen. 
 2001)   and  the myxomycetes are no exception. . Results from studies carried out across dif- ferent types of terrestrial ecosystems suggest that the species associated with  coarse woody debris represent one of the main components of overall myxomy- cete diversity (Ing. 
 1994; Maimoni-Rodella and Gottsberger. .  1980; Novozhilov  et al.. 
 2006; Rufino and Cavalcanti. .  2007; Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996;  Stephenson et al.. 
 2008; Takahashi. .  2001   2004; Takahashi and Harakon. .  2012)   Myxomycetes. 
 especially species forming large (>1–2 cm) compound fruiting  bodies (e.g.. .  species of Reticularia. .  Lycogala   Tubifera   and Fuligo) have a  strong preference for large pieces of coarse woody debris and are found mostly  in the field. 
 whereas the moist chamber culture technique is much less effective  in recovering these species. . The majority of the data on substrate preferences of lignicolous myxomy- cetes has been derived from records of fruiting bodies appearing on the surface  of logs. . As such   we do not have a clear picture of whether or not the trophic  stages of lignicolous myxomycetes live close to the surface or also occur within  the logs. .  where microclimatic conditions should be more stable. 
Two studies  (Ostrofsky and Shigo, 1981; Taylor et al., 2015) claim to have detected myxo- mycetes within solid wood; in both studies agar cultures were prepared. . A recent  metagenomics approach for the bright-spored clade (superorder Lucisporidia;  Clissmann et al.. .  2015) revealed 260 SSU sequences of bright-spored myxomy- cetes that were assembled into 29 OTUs from wood cores of logs. . Wood has a wide range of chemical and physical characteristics (Samuelsson  et al., 1994) and thus may provide a wide range of putative ecological niches  for myxomycetes. 
Evidence comes from the well-known turnover of different  species associated with different decay states (Takahashi and Hada, 2009). . A  study classifying coarse woody debris into four decay stages found the highest  276     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology myxomycete diversity was associated with final stages of decay (Schnittler and  Novozhilov. .  1996)  Takahashi and Hada (2009) suggested that the state of wood  decay affects the species composition of the microbes that inhabit it and. .  in  turn   the species composition of their predators. 
 the myxomycetes. . These au- thors report that Stemonitis splendens significantly preferred slightly decayed,  rather than dry wood. . Species of Physarum emerged mainly on slightly decom- posed, fairly hard wood, but rapidly decreased in occurrence with the progres- sion of decay. . Conversely, five species in the Cribrariaceae and Ceratiomyxa  fruticulosa var. . porioides increased significantly with the progression of decay. 
 Lindbladia cribrarioides was reported to prefer soft damp wood. . Because wood  decay is accompanied by increasing water content (Renvall, 1995), the moisture  content of the wood depends on the state of decay. . Consequently, Takahashi and  Hada (2009) suggested that water retention determines as well the occurrence  of lignicolous myxomycetes. . In this study, the distribution of almost all spe- cies was attributed to a narrow range of moisture content, which was restricted  to 60%–100% on average, except for S. . splendens, which occurred on low- moisture wood. . Another very important factor in the occurrence of lignicolous species is  the pH of the wood. 
Clissmann et al. . (2015) found pH to be the main ecologi- cal parameter accounting for the distribution of OTUs on coarse woody debris. .  Logs with a pH range between 5.34 and 5.66 had the most diverse myxomycete  assemblages, suggesting a link between pH and diversity. . It is likely that pH and  the decay stage of wood are not completely independent variables. . Bark of Living Woody Plants The guild of corticolous myxomycetes (ca. 
120 species). .  the members of  which are associated with the bark surface of living trees. .  shrubs and lia- nas has been known for a long time (Gilbert and Martin. 
 1933; Keller  and Brooks. .  1973   1976a  b; Lister   1915; McHugh. .  1998; Mitchell. .  1978;  Penfound. .  1940)  Most species in this guild possess minute fruiting bodies  and can be detected reliably only through the use of the moist chamber culture  technique (Härkönen. 
 1977   1978; Keller and Brooks. .  1977; Mitchell. .  1977;  Snell et al.. .  2003; Stephenson. 
 1985)  The first time this technique was used  in Scotland by W. . Cran (Lister, 1938), but it became popular only after being  described by Gilbert and Martin (1933). 
While studying epiphytic algae, these  authors found that numerous fruiting bodies of P. . fimbriata appeared on pieces  of poplar bark placed in a moist chamber culture. . Subsequent years of research  have revealed a whole assemblage of species apparently adapted for surviv- al on tree bark (Brooks et al.. 
 1977; Keller. .  1980; Keller and Brooks. .  1976b;  Rodríguez-Palma et al.. 
 2002)  Early students doubted that the results obtained from bark cultures reflected  a natural assemblage. . Peterson (1952) suggested that the bark works only as  a spore trap for myxomycetes but does not represent the real microhabitat for  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    277 their trophic stages. . Later experiments, covering bark pieces under a plastic  film, confirmed that some species complete their entire life cycle from spore  to fruiting bodies in bark fissures (Pendergrass, 1976). 
Many species having a  protoplasmodium. .  especially members of the genera Echinostelium and Licea. .   are well known to be corticolous. 
 developing rapidly on bark that dries out soon  after a period of moist weather. . Members of this group tend to develop fruiting  bodies in a few days and possess protoplasmodia or minute aphanoplasmodia. 
 Some authors differentiate between obligate and facultative bark-inhabiting spe- cies. . For example, Diachea arboricola has been found only on the bark of living  trees above a height of 3 m and is considered a true corticolous myxomycete  (Keller et al., 2004). . In contrast, although primarily corticolous, Echinostelium  minutum is not uncommon on litter and dung. 
Although corticolous species are  often abundant and widespread, they appear to be more specialized than other  ecological groups of myxomycetes. . Bark texture, pH, water-holding capacity, tree height, and epiphyte load can  be very important environmental factors for corticolous myxomycetes (Everhart  and Keller, 2008; Everhart et al., 2008). . Stephenson (1989) reported that the  thick. 
 furrowed   rough bark of trees could be effective at trapping myxomycete  spores from the air. .  and in his study the former yielded more species than trees  with a thin. .  smooth bark surface. . In contrast, he found high species richness  on Betula alleghaniensis, which has smooth bark. . A similar trend was found  for lianas. 
 where the highest species richness and highest diversity index were  recorded for smooth bark. .  followed by intermediate-furrowed bark and then  rough bark (Ko Ko et al.. .  2010)  The authors suggested that perhaps spores of  some species of myxomycetes possess a high enough viscosity to allow them to  adhere to smooth bark surfaces. . In arid regions. 
 it has been reported (Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  2008;  Novozhilov et al.. .  2006; Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  2000; Schnittler  et al.. 
 2013   2015b) that the fissured and peeling bark of desert shrubs was  characterized by the most distinctive assemblage of myxomycetes. .  with sharply  contrasting species preferences and clearly associated common species. .  whereas  smooth and smooth but breaking with age bark. .  and fibrous types of bark clus- tered together and displayed no clear patterns with respect to the occurrence  of the more common species. . The high percentage of positive bark cultures  seemed to indicate that textured bark serves as a better spore trap than smooth  bark. . Deeply fissured bark provided as well a higher surface area per square  centimeter and better water retention. 
 therefore allowing a prolonged time win- dow for bacterial growth and myxomycete development. . However, Snell and  Keller (2003) did not find a correlation between the water-holding capacity of  bark and species richness and diversity of corticolous myxomycetes. . A few studies have investigated the assemblages of myxomycetes found at  different heights on trees (Everhart et al., 2009; Snell and Keller, 2003; Wrigley  de Basanta, 1998). . These studies did not show any strong trends related to height  in the canopy except for a single type of tree. . There was a significant decrease  278     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology in species richness of myxomycetes from the bottom to the top of Platanus  occidentalis (Everhart et al.. .  2009)  Bark pH (see earlier) seems to be inversely correlated with species richness  of corticolous myxomycetes. . Assemblages of myxomycetes from coniferous  trees with low pH differ. 
 often strongly. .  from assemblages on deciduous broad- leaf trees with a bark with a slightly acidic to neutral pH (Everhart et al.. .  2008;  Schnittler et al.. .  2016; Snell et al.. 
 2003)  The moss-covered logs (Ing. .  1983) of Western Great Britain and Ireland  (McHugh. 
 1998) are characterized by a high diversity of myxomycetes in spite  of the dense mats of epiphytic organisms present upon the bark. . Schnittler and  Stephenson (2000) suggested that a high epiphyte cover seems to be one— although not the only—reason for low abundance and diversity of corticolous  myxomycetes in the tropics. 
The most probable reasons for this phenomenon  are an excess in rainfall. .  connected with the fact that the bark surface of tree  trunks in closed-canopy cloud forests rarely dries out and is often has an ex- tensive cover of liverworts and mosses present. . Furthermore, the heavy tropical  rains probably remove myxomycete plasmodia and spores from the bark sur- face. . In addition to this mechanical effect, a leaching effect caused by the sheer  amount of rainfall cannot be ruled out, with soluble nutrients and microorgan- isms being removed from the bark. . Overall   the general pattern for corticolous myxomycetes is an increase in  diversity and percentage of positive moist chamber cultures from tropical for- ests (Ko Ko et al.. 
 2010; Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a; Rojas et al.. 
 2010; Schnittler  and Stephenson. .  2000; Stephenson et al.. 
 2004b)   to boreal forests (Novozhilov  et al.. .  1999; Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996; Schnittler et al.. .  2016)   to decidu- ous broadleaf forests (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2017b; Peterson. .  1952; Stephenson. 
  1989)   to Mediterranean forests (Pando. .  1989; Pando and Lodo. .  1987; Wrigley  de Basanta. 
 1998) and ultimately to grasslands and deserts (Davison et al.. .  2008;  Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2009; Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  2008; Novozhilov  et al.. .  2006   2013a; Schnittler et al.. 
 2013)  Aerial Microhabitats Aerial litter consists of dead but still attached leaves of trees and other plant  parts. .  fallen leaves trapped in tree branches. 
 dead fruits. .  flowers   and woody  remnants of dead twigs and lianas. .  which collectively make up a significant  amount of dead biomass in forest ecosystems (Thomas and Packham. .  2007)   Assemblages of protosteloid amoebae on aerial litter (Aguilar et al.. 
 2007;  Moore and Stephenson. .  2003; Shadwick et al.. .  2009; Stephenson et al.. .  1999;  Zahn et al.. .  2014) have been more thoroughly characterized for this microhabi- tat than myxomycetes. 
Temperate deciduous forests with a seasonal variation  in leaf-fall contain much less aerial litter than is the case for tropical forests. .  Aerial litter in the former consists mainly of woody remnants, which represent  suitable microhabitats for lignicolous myxomycetes (Schnittler et al., 2006). .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    279 These authors estimated the total number of species in this microhabitat to vary  between 42 and 45. . The most common species were A. 
cinerea, Perichaena  depressa, P. . chrysosperma, P. . vermicularis, Physarum leucophaeum, and  Stemonitis fusca. . In tropical forests, myxomycetes often inhabit aerial microhabitats. . For  example. 
 studies of such microhabitats in the Yucatan recorded 17 species  (Stephenson et al.. .  2003)   in Ecuador 11 species (Stephenson et al.. .  2004a)   in  Australia 11 species (Black et al.. .  2004)   and in Vietnam 42 species (Novozhilov  et al.. .  2017a)  Results from recent studies in Brazil indicated that aerial litter  above the tide level was the preferred microhabitat for myxomycetes in man- groves (Cavalcanti et al.. 
 2016)   and eight species were recorded. . The most  common species on aerial woody remnants and leaves in tropical forests ap- pear to be A. . cinerea, Didymium squamulosum, Collaria arcyrionema, and  Ph. 
compressum. . The composition of this assemblage differs from that found in  temperate forests. . In addition to woody remnants. .  aerial microhabitats in the  tropics include foliicolous liverworts and lichens covering leaves of understory  woody plants (Schnittler. 
 2001b; Stephenson et al.. .  2004a)   inflorescence of gi- ant herbaceous plants (Schnittler and Stephenson. .  2002) and the aerial “canopy  soil” (Stephenson and Landolt. 
 2015) associated with vascular and nonvascular  epiphytes. . Lowland rain forests with a high annual rainfall seem to provide the best  conditions for the growth of epiphyllous myxomycetes associated with the liv- erworts (mostly members of the family Lejeuneaceae) covering living leaves  (Schnittler. 
 2001b; Schnittler and Stephenson. .  2000)  Compared with other mi- crohabitats. 
 such as leafy litter on the forest floor or the bark of living trees. .   assemblages of myxomycetes associated with epiphyllous liverworts appear to  be rather species poor. .  and Schnittler (2001b) recorded only 11 species from  this microhabitat. . The average frequency of the three most common species  (A. . cinerea, Didymium iridis, and D. . squamulosum) was surprisingly high. 
 These species are likely to be regular inhabitants of liverwort-covered leaves. .  However, none of the myxomycetes found the study mentioned earlier seem to  be specialized for living leaves as a microhabitat. . Unusually small numbers of  fruiting bodies found in the moist chamber cultures, along with the occurrence  of atypically small fruiting bodies, suggest a microhabitat poor in nutrients. .  More studies. 
 such as axenic culture of epiphyllous specimens of Didymium and  moist chamber cultures of twigs with leaves kept alive by watering are neces- sary to understand more completely the ecology of epiphyllous myxomycetes. . The assemblage of myxomycetes associated with inflorescences is also rather  poor in species (Schnittler and Stephenson, 2002). . A comparison with the myxo- mycetes recorded from other litter substrates showed that more than half of the  13 more common species are ubiquists. .  occurring with about the same frequency  or even more often on other litter substrates. 
Prominent examples are D. . squamu- losum and D. 
iridis, both very common on all kinds of aerial litter. . Both species  are several times more common on other litter substrates than on inflorescences. .  280     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology The relatively low percentage of positive cultures suggests that the frequency of  occurrence of myxomycetes in canopy soil is not especially high. .  but the num- bers of plasmodia recorded from those cultures that were positive also suggests  that these organisms can be relatively common in this microhabitat (Stephenson  and Landolt. 
 2015)  Myxomycete assemblages associated with aerial litter seem  not to consist of specialized species. . Studies carried out in grassland ecosystems  found that the aerial litter of grasses and forbs represent a suitable microhabi- tat for many species. .  but of the 16 species recorded from this microhabitat. 
 the  two most common (Badhamia melanospora and S. . fusca) were often found on  ground litter and wood (Rollins and Stephenson, 2013). . In contrast, 6 of the 13  species of myxomycetes from inflorescences of tropical herbs, including the two  most common examples (Ph. 
compressum and Ph. . didermoides) showed a clear  preference for this microhabitat (Schnittler and Stephenson, 2002). . The canopy as myxomycete habitat was first investigated for broadleaf  deciduous forests of the Appalachians with the single-rope technique. .  fo- cusing on corticolous species associated the tree trunks (Keller et al.. 
 2004;  Snell et al.. .  2003)  Another study used a canopy crane (Schnittler et al.. .  2006;  Unterseher et al.. 
 2005) to investigate small twigs from the upper- and outer- most canopy (height of 30 m) for the occurrence of myxomycetes. . Wood of dead  twiglets attached to their still living parts seem to form appropriate “islands” in  the canopy for many lignicolous myxomycetes. . The species richness of lignico- lous canopy myxomycetes (32 species from 146 cultures in this study) seems to  be comparable with that of corticolous canopy myxomycetes recorded by Snell  and Keller (2003) from the Great Smoky Mountains (48 species from more  than 418 cultures). 
In contrast to the tropics, where many species occur almost  exclusively in the canopy, most of the species detected in this study also may  fruit on logs on the ground. . Tropical Lianas At least a few lianas occur in most types of temperate forests, but this growth  form is most common in tropical forests (Schnitzer and Bongers, 2002). . Rely- ing on the supportive structure of trees to reach the light, lianas typically pro- duce a soft wood with wide vessels. 
This results in high water retention for its  woody debris and thus makes this microhabitat very suitable for myxomycetes  (Wrigley de Basanta et al., 2008). . In addition, the bark and woody remnants of  lianas have near-neutral pH values (5.4–8.5) that are suitable for many species  of myxomycetes. . This microhabitat was investigated for Neotropical forests  (Lado et al.. 
 2003; McHugh. .  2005; Schnittler et al.. .  2002; Wrigley de Basanta  et al.. 
 2008)   forests in Northern Queensland in Australia (Black et al.. .  2004)  and Southeastern Asia (Ko Ko et al.. 
 2010)  A  cinerea, Diderma hemisphaeri- cum, D. . squamulosum, Physarum pusillum, and S. 
fusca var  nigrescens appear  to be among the more consistently abundant and widespread members of the  assemblage of myxomycetes associated with lianas. . Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    281 Weathered Dung of Herbivorous Animals The dung of herbivorous animals consists of the macerated and undigested  remains of plants plus vast quantities of bacteria and animal waste products. .  The nature of herbivore dung depends on the efficiency of the digestive tract,  which, in turn, depends on the animal’s digestive anatomy and its microflora. .  Most studies of coprophilous organisms have focused on fungi (Angel and  Wicklow. 
 1975; Dickinson and Underhay. .  1977; Dix and Webster. .  1995; Krug  et al.. .  2002; Nyberg and Persoon. .  2002) or beetles (Hanski and Cambefort. 
  1991)  Coprophilous (or fimicolous) myxomycetes have been known for a  long time (Eliasson and Lundqvist, 1979; Krug et al., 2004; Marchal, 1895);  however, the ecology of this group is not well studied. . There are approxi- mately 115 species of myxomycetes that have been recorded from dung  (Eliasson. .  2013)   and most of these commonly occur in other microhabitats  and thus their occurrence on dung is merely coincidental. . However, compared  to most other ecological assemblages, at least some coprophilous myxomy- cetes show a high level of specialization (Eliasson and Keller, 1999). 
Among  the species most commonly encountered on dung are Badhamia apiculos- pora, B. . spinispora, Licea alexopouli, Perichaena liceoides, P. . luteola, and  Kelleromyxa fimicola. . Most records for this group have been obtained from moist chamber culture  studies in regions with a monsoon or semiarid climate (Bezerra et al.. 
 2008;  Chung and Liu. .  1995   1996; García-Zorrón. 
 1977)   whereas in the humid trop- ics dung often does not last long enough because of rapid degradation by ar- thropods. . To a lesser extent. 
 the dung of herbivorous animals and birds which  feed on seeds. .  buds or other plant parts may accumulate in temperate and boreal  forests (Eliasson and Lundqvist. 
 1979)   as well as in tundra (Novozhilov and  Schnittler. .  2000; Novozhilov et al.. .  1999)   where coprophilous myxomycetes  have been documented as well. 
In general, this substrate is not very produc- tive (Stephenson, 1989), with deserts and grasslands representing the most  noteworthy exceptions. . The maximum diversity and abundance of coprophi- lous myxomycetes seems to be associated with cool and dry climates. 
 where  the prevailing conditions slow down the decomposition of dung (Novozhilov  and Schnittler. .  2008; Novozhilov et al.. .  2006   2010; Schnittler and Novozhi- lov. .  2000; Schnittler et al.. 
 2015b)  Considering animal species, the dung of domestic herbivores, such as the  cow and horse has been found to be more productive than that from wild ani- mals. . Eliasson (2013) reviewed many aspects of the diversity and ecology of  coprophilous myxomycetes and emphasized the need for special studies to  elucidate possible adaptations related to the passage of myxomycete spores  through the digestive system of a herbivore. . Key features seem to be the ultra- structure of spore walls and spore germination. . Thick-walled spores, like these  found in L. 
alexopouli (Blackwell, 1974), K. . fimicola (Eliasson et al.. .  1991;  Erastova et al.. .  2013)   and Trichia brunnea (Eliasson and Keller. 
 1999)   indicate  282     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology that spores taken up by herbivores can remain alive after passage though the  digestive system. . Soil It is generally assumed that soil protozoans (Bonkowski, 2004; Sherman, 1916)  and bacterivorous nematodes (Kudrin et al., 2015) largely control the growth of  bacteria in soils. . As mentioned earlier, myxomycetes may represent the larg- est component of total protozoan soil biodiversity, and species diversity can be  very high. . Currently   most studies of soil myxomycetes have provided only es- timates of the abundance of trophic stages or propagules and could not identify  the species involved because of the problem of identifying amoeboflagellates  to species. . According to these estimations, the density of the amoeboflagel- late cells of myxomycetes reaches hundreds of thousand cells per gram dry  soil (Feest, 1985). . Approaches employing environmental PCR do not allow  for overall estimates of amoeboflagellate density but have revealed a high ge- netic diversity of the myxomycete assemblages present in soil (Fiore-Donno  et al.. 
 2016)  However, despite these efforts, our understanding of soil myxo- mycete diversity and functioning in ecosystems remains poor. . Stephenson and  Feest (2012) reviewed all that is currently known about the diversity and ecol- ogy of soil myxomycetes. . Most species associated with soil fruit well on leaf  litter. 
Most of the sequences from dark-spored myxomycetes observed from  soil by molecular methods were assigned to Lamproderma spp. . and Didymium  spp. 
(Fiore-Donno et al., 2016). . Tiunov et al. 
(2015) suggested that a significant  difference in δ13C and δ15N values shows that prey types and/or basal food  sources may differ among different species of myxomycetes. . This suggestion  remains speculative, as there is no detailed information on the feeding mode of  amoeboflagellates or plasmodia in natural conditions. . Aquatic Habitats Despite the fact that myxomycetes are typically considered as terrestrial organ- isms, the plasmodia and amoeboflagellates of some species have been observed  to survive under water. 
Didymium aquatile. .  one of the few species described  from aquatic environments. .  was found in a stream in the tropical forests of Brazil  as submerged fruiting bodies (Gottsberger and Nannenga-Bremekamp. 
 1971)   Some experiments using aquaria and moist chamber cultures indicate that ter- restrial species may fruit in submerged conditions. . An early report described a  species of myxomycete (probably Didymium difforme or Physarum cinereum)  fruiting on plant roots under water (Ward, 1886). . Subsequently, the ability to  grow under water has been reported for Physarum gyrosum, Ph. 
album, Fuligo  cinerea, Fuligo septica (Parker, 1946), Didymium nigripes (Kappel, 1992;  Müller et al., 2008), D. . iridis (Keller and Braun, 1999), and Diderma effusum  (Tamayama and Keller, 2013). . In addition. 
 myxomycetes have been recorded  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    283 from moist chamber cultures of aquatic substrates (Bodyagin and Barsukova. .   2009; Lindley et al.. .  2007; Shearer and Crane. 
 1986)   although direct evidence  that the entire life cycle of these species takes place in the water was not ob- tained. . More studies, especially those employing environmental PCR and/or  cultures to reveal the presence of myxomycetes in bodies of water, are required. . Effect of Disturbance Events on Assemblages of Myxomycetes Disturbance effects on communities of larger organisms. 
 such as plants and  animals are well documented. .  but much less attention has been directed toward  microorganisms despite their importance in biogeochemical processes through  decomposition and other mechanisms (Carreño-Rocabado et al.. 
 2012; Ohlson  et al.. .  1997; Sun et al.. 
 2015)  The impact of different types of disturbance  events on myxomycetes is limited to a very small number of studies. .  including  wildfire (Adamonytė et al.. .  2016)   flooding (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)   fertiliza- tion by bird colonies (Adamonytė et al.. 
 2013)   and various anthropogenic fac- tors studied by Härkönen (1977). .  Härkönen and Vänskä (2004). .  and Wrigley de  Basanta (2000). 
For example, Adamonytė et al. . (2016) reported that in the sites  they studied only crown fire plots showed a clear chronosequence of postfire  myxomycete assemblages. . The impact of fire was to promote the establishment  and/or fruiting of species of myxomycetes which are rare in similar unburned  sites or are usually confined to other types of forests and substrates. . Limited data from field studies indicate that forest structure seems to be a  driver of differences in species composition and abundance of the myxomyce- tes associated with aerial litter. .  ground litter. .  and soil (Rojas and Stephenson. 
  2013)  Rojas and Valverde (2015) reported more narrow niches and a higher  level of coexistence for myxomycetes in dry compared to wet forests. . Data from  Ethiopia indicate that human activity (collecting of fuelwood) reduces species  diversity of lignicolous myxomycetes (Dagamac et al., 2017a). . As such, it re- mains unclear to what extent myxomycete assemblages change in response to  changes of climate, vegetation disturbance, and landscape cover alterations. . Phenology of Sporulation (Seasonality of Myxomycetes) Since many species of myxomycetes display pronounced fruiting peaks which  correspond to seasons. 
 at least two field surveys in a year are often necessary to  document the species inventory for a region (Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996)   Since this poses logistical problems for field work, many published checklists  from singular surveys can be expected to have a large bias for certain pheno- logical groups. . Only a few surveys have investigated temporal changes in the  fruiting of myxomycetes (Blackwell and Gilbertson. 
 1984; Eliasson. .  1981;  Kazunari. .  2010; Ko Ko et al.. .  2011; Stephenson. 
 1988; Stojanowska. .  1980a  b;  Takahashi. .  1995; Takahashi and Hada. .  2008; Tran et al.. .  2006)  As expected. 
 the  highest fluctuations in fruiting activity were found for regions with a pronounced  284     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology dry season. 
 such as the Pacific coast of Costa Rica (Stephenson et al.. .  2004b)  or regions of southeastern Asia with a monsoon climate (Ko Ko et al.. .  2011)    where species richness and diversity were higher for the warm-wet season than  for the cool-dry season. . Some members of the order Stemonitales were encoun- tered only during the warm-wet season, whereas members of the order Physara- les appear to be more common during the cool-dry season. . Different groups of  myxomycetes with different fruiting activity have also been reported in temper- ate deciduous (Schnittler et al.. 
 2010; Stephenson. .  1988; Stojanowska. 
 1980b)  and boreal forests (Eliasson. .  1981; Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996; Vlasenko  and Novozhilov. 
 2011)  Even within one ecological group the phenology of species can differ. .  Novozhilov and Schnittler (1997) classified the cryophilous litter-inhabiting  myxomycetes on the Kola Peninsula into two subgroups, based on phenology  and habitat requirements. 
The first subgroup contains the “true” nivicolous  species (Diacheopsis effusa, Diderma niveum, and species of Lepidoderma and  Lamproderma with the exception of Lamproderma sauteri). . The second sub- group of species was more cryophilous, growing predominantly in summer under  cool and wet conditions on litter, especially in shady woodlands. 
Ph  cinereum,  Didymium deplanatum, D. . dubium, and perhaps Trichia alpina and L. . sauteri  can be placed in this subgroup. 
The most prominent example of seasonal fruit- ing has been documented for B. . minutissima (Schnittler et al., 2000). 
In southern  regions Barbeyella fruits in the winter, whereas in more northern regions  peak fruiting occurs in September to early October (eastern North America)  or mid-October (Germany). . Observations from the German Alps (Schnittler  and Novozhilov, 1998) and the Leningrad region of Russia (Novozhilov pers. .  comm.) provided evidence that fruiting bodies of Barbeyella can develop at  temperatures between 0 and 10°C. . Relationships With Other Organisms Myxomycetes are frequently associated with insects, especially beetles  (Coleoptera). . Stephenson and Stempen (1994) along with Dudka and  Romanenko (2006) reviewed the cooccurrences of myxomycetes and bee- tles recorded since the end of the nineteenth century. 
 and listed the beetle  families (Rhizodidae. .  Leiodidae. .  Staphylinidae. .  Clambidae. 
 Eucinetidae. .   Sphindidae. .  Cerylonidae. .  Latridiidae) most frequently involved in these  associations. 
The numerous and repeated records of some beetles on cer- tain species of myxomycetes at least suggests a positive association. . Some  beetles feed not only on spores but also on plasmodia (Lawrence and New- ton, 1980; Wheeler, 1980). . The term myxomycetophagy has been proposed  to describe the phenomenon that beetles feed on slime molds (Newton and  Stephenson, 1990). 
These authors discussed the extent to which members  of the most specialized family (Latridiidae) are obligate or facultative feed- ers on myxomycetes. . Newton and Stephenson (1990) considered their new  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    285 species of Dienerella from India to be a facultative feeder. . Results from the  Ukraine suggest that Latridius hirtus, Enicmus rugosus, and E. . fungicola  may be obligate feeders (Dudka and Romanenko, 2006). . In particular,  L. 
hirtus has been shown to be capable of completing its life cycle with only  myxomycetes as a food supply. . However   Corticarina truncatella is more  likely to be facultative. .  since records of this species on myxomycetes are  rather rare. .  and it is usually found in forest floor litter. .  on hay and other plant  remains. 
Furthermore, gut content analysis shows that this species feeds on  fungal spores and on those of myxomycetes. . It seems that some species of myxomycetes may be closely associated with  bryophytes and blue-green algae (Stephenson and Studlar, 1985). 
Schnittler and  Novozhilov (1996), while working in Karelia, found large colonies of Collo- derma oculatum and Lepidoderma tigrinum on the layers of mosses situated  on rocks. . There was no wood available as an alternative substrate, and the only  conclusion was that some species of myxomycetes are well-adapted to living  together with mosses. . Ing (1983) described a myxomycete association in simi- lar microhabitats in England but with an almost completely different set of spe- cies. 
The ecology of this system was characterized by Schnittler et al. . (2010),  who suggested that algae may be a possible food source for the plasmodia. .  B  minutissima and C. 
oculatum have a remarkable preference for decorticat- ed logs coated with unicellular algae, which form gelatinous layers. . Evidence  for a stable association of these myxomycetes with algae was presented by  Schnittler and Novozhilov (1998). . Bacteria apparently represent the main food  resource for both trophic stages in the myxomycete life cycle. 
 but plasmodia  are also known to feed upon yeasts. .  algae (including cyanobacteria). .  and fungal  spores and hyphae (Amewowor and Madelin. 
 1991; Kalyanasundaram. .  2004;  Madelin. .  1984a  b; Stephenson and Stempen. .  1994)  CONCLUSIONS In spite of a number of serious efforts that have been carried out during the  last few decades. 
 we still must acknowledge that there are major gaps in our  understanding of the roles that myxomycetes play in ecological systems and  their relationships with other organisms. . The major reason is the inaccessibility  of their tropic stages. .  and most of the available data are based on collections of  fruiting bodies and probably show only (in a literal sense) the tip of the iceberg. .   which may represent only a minor fraction of the real diversity of myxomycetes  in different habitats. . Advanced molecular methods (environmental PCR con- nected with metagenomic approaches together with attempts at barcoding) may  help to visualize the real diversity of their trophic stages. 
Analyses of stable  isotopes may help to elucidate the position of myxomycetes in the food web  if these data can be successfully related to the stable isotope composition of  soil bacteria. . For the same reasons, we still lack precise information on the true  niches of species of myxomycetes. . For example. 
 we know almost nothing about  286     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology the horizontal and vertical differentiation between populations of amoebofla- gellates in ground litter and soil. . Large-scale studies may help to determine  the crucial biotic and abiotic factors determining species richness and diversity  of myxomycetes in major ecosystems of the world. . As a precondition for such  macroecological studies. .  the gaps which exist for poorly studied regions (e.g.. 
  Africa   Southern Asia. .  Siberia   and the Far East) need to be filled by intense  regional surveys. 
Experiments using microcosms and different manipulation  methods (Altermatt et al.. .  2015) also may help to understand causal niche dif- ferentiation and speciation in myxomycetes (Drake and Kramer. .  2012)  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Yuri Novozhilov acknowledges the programs “Biodiversity and spatial structure of assem- blages of fungi and myxomycetes in natural and anthropogenic ecosystems” № 01201255604  and “Mycobiota of southern Vietnam” № 01201255603 (Komarov Botanical Institute RAS)  for support of his research. 
All three coauthors are especially grateful to Dr. . Roland McHugh  (Dublin, Ireland), Dr. . Grazina Adamonytė (Vilnius, Lithuania), and Dr. . Bruce Ing (Ullapool,  Great Britain) for helpful proofreading and their comments relating to this manuscript. . REFERENCES Adamonytė, G., Iršėnaitė, R., Motieju¯naitė, J., Taraškevicˇius, R., Matulevicˇiu¯tė, D., 2013. 
Myxomy- cetes in a forest affected by great cormorant colony: a case study in Western Lithuania. . Fungal  Divers. 
59, 131–146. .  Adamonytė, G., Motieju¯naitė, J., Iršėnaitė, R., 2016. 
Crown fire and surface fire: effects on myxo- mycetes inhabiting pine plantations. . Sci  Total Environ. 
572, 1431–1439. .  Aguilar, M., Lado, C., Spiegel, F.W., 2007. 
Protostelids from deciduous forests: first data from  southwestern Europe. . Mycol  Res  111, 863–872. .  Altermatt. 
 F    Fronhofer. .  E A    Garnier   A    Giometto   A    Hammes   F    Klecka   J    Legrand   D     Maechler. .  E    Massie   T M    Pennekamp. .  F    Plebani   M    Pontarp   M    Schtickzelle. .  N    Thuil- lier. 
 V    Petchey   O L    2015  Big answers from small worlds: a user’s guide for protist micro- cosms as a model system in ecology and evolution. . Methods Ecol. . Evol  6, 218–231. .  Amewowor, D.H.A.K., Madelin, M.F., 1991. 
Numbers of myxomycetes and associated microorgan- isms in the root zones of cabbage (Brassica-Oleracea) and broad bean (Vicia faba) in field plots. .  FEMS Microbiol. . Ecol  86, 69–82   Angel, K., Wicklow, D.T., 1975. 
Relationships between coprophilous fungi and fecal substrates in a  Colorado grassland. . Mycologia 67, 63–74. .  Anichkin, A.E., Tiunov, A.V., 2011. . Dynamics of plant litter decomposition. . In: Tiunov, A.V. 
 (Ed.), Structure and Functions of Soil Communities of a Monsoon Tropical Forest (Cat Tien  National Park, Southern Vietnam). . KMK Scientific Press, Moscow, pp. . 188–206 [In Russian  with English summary.]. .  Berg, B., McClaugherty, C., Santo, A.V.D., Johnson, D., 2001. . Humus buildup in boreal forests:  effects of litter fall and its N concentration. 
Can  J  For  Res  31, 988–998. .  Bezerra, M.F.A., Silva, W.T.M., Cavalcanti, L.H., 2008. . Coprophilous myxomycetes of Brazil: first  report. 
Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 29–37   Black, D.R., Stephenson, S.L., Pearce, C.A., 2004. . Myxomycetes associated with the aerial litter mi- crohabitat in tropical forests of Northern Queensland, Australia. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 129–132. .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    287 Blackwell, M., 1974. . A new species of Licea (myxomycetes). 
Proc  Iowa Acad  Sci  81, 6   Blackwell, M., Gilbertson, R.L., 1980. . Sonoran Desert myxomycetes. . Mycotaxon 11, 139–149. .  Blackwell, M.M., Gilbertson, R.L., 1984. . Distribution and sporulation phenology of myxomycetes  in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona. 
Microb  Ecol  10, 369–377. .  Bodyagin, V.V., Barsukova, T.N., 2009. 
Myxomycetes registered in basins of Moscow and Moscow  oblast. . Mikol  Fitopatol  43, 281–283, [in Russian, with English summary]. .  Bonkowski, M., 2004. 
Protozoa and plant growth: the microbial loop in soil revisited. . New Phytol. 
 162, 617–631. .  Broennimann, O., Fitzpatrick, M.C., Pearman, P.B., Petitpierre, B., Pellissier, L., Yoccoz, N.G.,  Thuiller, W., Fortin, M.-J., Randin, C., Zimmermann, N.E., Graham, C.H., Guisan, A., 2012. .  Measuring ecological niche overlap from occurrence and spatial environmental data. 
Global  Ecol. . Biogeogr  21, 481–497. .  Brooks, T.E., Keller, H.W., Chassain, M., 1977. 
Corticolous myxomycetes VI: a new species of  Diderma. . Mycologia 69, 179–184. .  Carreño-Rocabado, G., Peña-Claros, M., Bongers, F., Alarcón, A., Licona, J.-C., Poorter, L., 2012. .  Effects of disturbance intensity on species and functional diversity in a tropical forest. 
J  Ecol   100, 1453–1463. .  Cavalcanti, L.d.H., Damasceno, G., Costa, A.A.A., Bezerra, A.C.C., 2016. 
Myxomycetes in Bra- zilian mangroves: species associated with Avicennia nitida, Laguncularia racemosa and Rhi- zophora mangle. . Mar  Biodivers  Rec  9, 1–7   Cavalier-Smith, T., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Chao, E., Kudryavtsev, A., Berney, C., Snell, E.A., Lewis,  R., 2015. . Multigene phylogeny resolves deep branching of Amoebozoa. 
Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol   83, 293–304. .  Cavender, J.C., Kawabe, K., 1989. 
Cellular slime moulds of Japan. . I  Distribution and biogeo- graphical considerations. 
Mycologia 81, 683–691. .  Cavender, J.C., Raper, K.B., 1965. 
The Acrasiae in nature II. . Forest soil as a primary habitat. . Am   J  Bot  52, 297   Chao, A., Chazdon, R.L., Colwell, R.K., Shen, T.J., 2006. 
Abundance-based similarity indices and  their estimation when there are unseen species in samples. . Biometrics 62, 361–371. .  Chao, A., Shen, T.-J., Ma, K.H., Hsieh, T.C., 2016. 
User’s Guide for Program SPADE (Species  Prediction And Diversity Estimation). . Available from: http://chao.stat.nthu.edu.tw/ Chung, C.H., Liu, C.H., 1995. 
First report of fimicolous myxomycetes from Taiwan. . Fungal Sci. 
 10, 33–35. .  Chung, C.H., Liu, C.H., 1996. 
More fimicolous myxomycetes from Taiwan. . Taiwania 41, 259–264. .  Clissmann, F., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Hoppe, B., Krüger, D., Kahl, T., Unterseher, M., Schnittler, M.,  2015. 
First insight into dead wood protistan diversity: a molecular sampling of bright-spored  myxomycetes (Amoebozoa, slime-moulds) in decaying beech logs. . FEMS Microbiol. . Ecol  91,  doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiv050. .  Cole, L., 1949. 
The measurement of interspecific association. . Ecology 30, 411–424. .  Colwell, R.K., 2013. . EstimateS: Statistical Estimation of Species Richness and Shared Species from  Samples. 
Version 9  User’s Guide and Application. . Available from: http://purl.oclc.org/estimates Colwell, R.K., Futuyma, D.J., 1971. . On the measurement of niche breadth and overlap. . Ecology  52, 567–576. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Hoffmann, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2017a. 
Myxomycetes from the  highlands of Ethiopia. . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 11–127. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Novozhilov, Y.K., Stephenson, S.L., Lado, C., Rojas, C., dela Cruz, T.E.E.,  Unterseher, M., Schnittler, M., 2017b. 
Biogeographical assessment of myxomycete assem- blages from Neotropical and Asian Paleotropical forests. . J  Biogeogr., doi: 10.1111/jbi.12985. .  288     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Davis, J.C., Castleberry, S.B., Kilgo, J.C., 2010. . Influence of coarse woody debris on the soricid  community in southeastern Coastal Plain pine stands. 
J  Mammal  91, 993–999. .  Davison, E.M., Davison, P.J.N., Brims, M.H., 2008. 
Moist chamber and field collections of myxo- mycetes from the Northern Simpson desert, Australia. . Aust  Mycol  27, 129–135. .  Dickinson, C.H., Underhay, V.H.S., 1977. 
Growth of fungi in cattle dung. . Trans  Br  Mycol  Soc   69, 473–477. .  Dix, N.J., Webster, J., 1995. 
Coprophilous fungi. . In: Dix, N.J., Webster, J. . (Eds.), Fungal Ecology. .  Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. . 203–224   Dobrovol’skaya, T.G., Chernov, I.Y., Zvyagintsev, D.G., 1997. 
Characterizing the structure of bac- terial communities. . Microbiologia 66, 408–414. .  Drake, J., Kramer, A., 2012. 
Mechanistic analogy: how microcosms explain nature. . Theor  Ecol   5, 433–444. .  Dudka, I.A., Romanenko, E.A., 2006. 
Co-existence and interaction between myxomycetes and  other organisms in shared niches. . Acta Mycol. . 41, 99–112. .  Eliasson, U.H., 1977a. 
Ecological notes on Amaurochaete Rost. . (myxomycetes). 
Bot  Notiser 129,  419–425. .  Eliasson, U.H., 1977b. . Recent advances in the taxonomy of myxomycetes. 
Bot  Notiser 130,  483–492. .  Eliasson, U.H., 1981. 
Patterns of occurence of myxomycetes in a spruce forest in South Sweden. .  Holarct  Ecol  4, 20–31   Eliasson, U., 2013. 
Coprophilous myxomycetes: recent advances and future research directions. .  Fungal Divers. . 59, 85–90   Eliasson, U., Keller, H.W., 1999. 
Coprophilous myxomycetes: updated summary, key to species,  and taxonomic observations on Trichia brunnea, Arcyria elaterensis, and Arcyria stipata. .  Karstenia 39, 1–10. .  Eliasson, U., Keller, H.W., Schoknecht, J.D., 1991. 
Kelleromyxa, a new generic name for Licea  fimicola (Myxomycetes). . Mycol  Res  95, 1201–1207. .  Eliasson, U.H., Lundqvist, N., 1979. 
Fimicolous myxomycetes. . Bot  Notiser 132, 551–568. .  Erastova, D.A., Okun, M.V., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2013. 
Phylogenetic position of the  enigmatic myxomycete genus Kelleromyxa revealed by SSU rDNA sequences. . Mycol  Res   12, 599–608. .  Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Conde, E., Lado, C., 2009. 
Myxomycetes associated  with dryland ecosystems of the Tehuacán-Cuicatlán Valley Biosphere Reserve. . Mexico Fungal  Divers. . 36, 17–56   Everhart, S.E., Ely, J.S., Keller, H.W., 2009. 
Evaluation of tree canopy epiphytes and bark character- istics associated with the presence of corticolous myxomycetes. . Botany 87, 509–517. .  Everhart, S.E., Keller, H.W., 2008. 
Life history strategies of corticolous myxomycetes: the life  cycle, plasmodial types, fruiting bodies, and taxonomic orders. . Fungal Divers. . 29, 1–16   Everhart, S.E., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2008. 
Influence of bark pH on the occurrence and distribution  of tree canopy myxomycete species. . Mycologia 100, 191–204. .  Feest, A., 1985. 
Numerical abundance of myxomycetes (myxogastrids) in soil in the West of Eng- land. . Microb  Ecol  31, 353–360. .  Feest, A., 1987. 
The quantitative ecology of soil mycetozoa. . Prog  Protistol  2, 331–361. .  Feest, A.M., Madelin, M.F., 1985. 
A method for the enumeration of myxomycetes in soil and its  application to a wide range of soils. . FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett  31, 103–109. .  Feinsinger, P., Spears, E.E., Poole, R.W., 1981. 
A simple measure of niche breadth. . Ecology 62  (1), 27–32. .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    289 Feng, Y., Klahr, A., Janik, P., Ronikier, A., Hoppe, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2016. . What  an intron may tell: several sexual biospecies coexist in Meriderma spp. 
(myxomycetes). . Protist  167, 234–253. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Sex or no sex? Group I introns and independent marker genes reveal  the existence of three sexual but reproductively isolated biospecies in Trichia varia (Myxomy- cetes). . Org  Divers  Evol  15, 631–650. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2017. 
Molecular or morphological species? Myxomycete diversity in a  deciduous forest in northeastern Germany. . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 359–380. .  Fiore-Donno, A.-M., Berney, C., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. 
Higher-order phylogeny of  plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA  gene sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 1–10   Fiore-Donno, A.M., Clissmann, F., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. . Two-gene  phylogeny of bright-spored myxomycetes (slime moulds, superorder Lucisporidia). 
PLoS One  8, e62586. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., Baldauf, S.L.,  2010. 
Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (Mycetozoa). . Protist 161, 55–70. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Weinert, J., Wubet, T., Bonkowski, M., 2016. . Metacommunity analysis of  amoeboid protists in grassland soils. 
Sci  Rep  6, 19068   García-Zorrón, N., 1977. . Mixomicetos coprofilos del Uruguay. . Rev  Biol  Uruguay 5, 47–50. .  Gilbert, H.C., Martin, G.W., 1933. 
Myxomycetes found on the bark of living trees. . Univ  Iowa Stud   Nat  Hist  15, 3–8   Gotelli, N.J., Colwell, R.K., 2011. . Chapter IV: estimating species richness. . In: Magurran, A.E.,  McGill, B.J. . (Eds.), Biological Diversity Frontiers in Measurement and Assessment. 
Oxford  University Press, New York, NY, pp. . 39–54   Gottsberger, G., Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1971. 
A new species of Didymium from Brazil Pro- ceedings Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen. . Ser  C  Proc  Koninklijke  Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen. . Ser  C 74, 264–268. .  Hanski, I., Cambefort, Y., 1991. . Dung Beetle Ecology. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. .  Härkönen, M., 1977. . Corticolous myxomycetes in three different habitats in southern Finland. 
 Karstenia 17, 19–32. .  Härkönen, M., 1978. 
Corticolous myxomycetes in Northern Finland and Norway. . Ann  Bot  Fennici  15, 32–37. .  Härkönen, M., Ukkola, T., 2000. 
Conclusions on myxomycetes compiled of twenty-five years from  4793 moist chamber cultures. . Stapfia 73, 105–112. .  Härkönen, M., Vänskä, H., 2004. 
Corticolous myxomycetes and lichens in the Botanical Garden  in Helsinki, Finland: a comparison after decades of recovering from air pollution. . Syst  Geogr   Plants 74, 183–187. .  Harmon, M.E., Franklin, J.F., Swanson, F.J., Sollins, P., Gregory, S.V., Lattin, J.D., Anderson,  N.H., Cline, S.P., Aumen, N.G., Sedell, J.R., Lienkaemper, G.W., Cromack, K.J., Cummins,  K.W., 2004. . Ecology of coarse woody debris in temperate ecosystems. 
Adv  Ecol  Res  34,  59–234. .  Haskins, E.F., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. 
Methods of agar culture of myxomycetes: an overview. .  Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 1–7   Hill, M.O., 1973. 
Diversity and eveness: a unifying notation and its consequences. . Ecology 54,  427–432. .  Hoppe, T., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Characterization of myxomycetes in two different soils by TRFLP  analysis of partial 18S rRNA gene sequences. . Mycosphere 6, 216–227. .  290     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Indira, P.U., 1968. . Some Slime moulds from Southern India. . IX  Distribution, habitat and variation. 
 J  Indian Bot. . Soc  67, 330–341. .  Ing, B., 1983. 
A ravine association of myxomycetes. . J  Biogeogr  10, 299   Ing, B., 1994. . The phytosociology of myxomycetes. . New Phytol. 
126, 175–201. .  Jongman, R.H.G., Ter Braak, C.J.F., van Tongeren, O.F.R., 1995. 
Data Analysis in Community and  Landscape Ecology. . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. .  Kalyanasundaram, I., 2004. 
A positive ecological role for tropical myxomycetes in association with  bacteria. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 239–242. .  Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., Fukui, M., Fiore-Donno, A.-M., 2013. 
Exploring slime  mould diversity in high-altitude forests and grasslands by environmental RNA analysis. . FEMS  Microbiol. 
Ecol  84, 98–109. .  Kappel, T., 1992. 
An aquarium myxomycetes: Didymium nigripes. . Mycologist 6, 106–107. .  Kazunari, T., 2010. 
Succession in myxomycete communities on dead Pinus densiflora wood in a  secondary forest in southwestern Japan. . Ecol  Res  25 (5), 995–1006. .  Keller, H.W., 1980. 
Corticolous myxomycetes VIII: Trabrooksia, a new genus. . Mycologia 72,  395–403. .  Keller, H.W., Braun, K., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of Ohio: Their Systematics, Biology and Use in  Teaching. . Ohio Biological Survey, Columbus. . Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1973. 
Corticolous myxomycetes I: two new species of Didymium. . My- cologia 65, 286–294. .  Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1976a. 
Corticolous myxomycetes V: observations on the genus Echi- nostelium. . Mycologia 68, 1204–1220. .  Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1976b. 
Corticolous myxomycetes: IV. . Badhamiopsis, a new genus for  Badhamia ainoae. 
Mycologia 68, 834–841. .  Keller, H.W., Brooks, T.E., 1977. 
Corticolous myxomycetes VII: contribution toward a monograph  of Licea, five new species. . Mycologia 69, 667–684. .  Keller, H.W., Skrabal, M., Eliasson, U., Gaither, T., 2004. 
Tree canopy biodiversity in the Great  Smoky Mountains National Park: ecological and development observations of a new myxomy- cete species of Diachea. . Mycologia 96, 537–547. .  Kerr, S.J., 1994. . Frequency of recovery of myxomycetes from soils of the Northern United States. 
 Can  J  Bot  72, 771–778. .  Kerr, N.S., Sussman, M., 1958. 
Clonal development of the true slime mould, Didymium nigripes. .  J  Gen  Microbiol  19, 173–177. .  Kilgore, C.M., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2009. 
Aerial reproductive structures of vascular plants as a  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 101, 305–319. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Lumyong, S., 2011. . Influence of seasonality on the  occurrence of myxomycetes. 
Chiang Mai J. . Sci  38, 71–84   Ko Ko, T.W., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.H., Rojas, C., Lumyong, S., 2010. 
Patterns of occurrence  of myxomycetes on lianas. . Fungal Ecol. 
3, 302–310. .  Krebs, C.J., 1999. . Ecological Methodology. 
Addison-Welsey Educational Publishers, Menlo Park, CA. .  Krug, J.C., Benny, G.L., Keller, H.W., 2002. . Coprophilous Fungi. 
Smithsonian Institution Press,  Washington, DC. .  Krug, J.C., Benny, G.L., Keller, H.W., 2004. . Coprophilous fungi. . In: Mueller, G.M., Bills, G.F.,  Foster, M.S. 
(Eds.), Biodiversity of Fungi. . Inventory and Monitoring Methods. . Elsevier Aca- demic Press, Burlington, pp. . 467–499   Kudrin, A.A., Tsurikov, S.M., Tiunov, A.V., 2015. 
Trophic position of microbivorous and predatory  soil nematodes in a boreal forest as indicated by stable isotope analysis. . Soil Biol  Biochem   86, 193–200. .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    291 Lado, C., 2005–2016. . An on-line nomenclatural information system of Eumycetozoa. . Available  from: http://www.nomen.eumycetozoa.com Lado, C., Estrada Torres, A., Ramirez, M., Conde, E., 2002. . A study of the succulenticolous myxo- mycetes from arid zones of Mexico. 
Scripta Bot. . Belg  22, 58   Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Schnittler, M., 2003. 
Biodi- versity assessment of myxomycetes from two tropical forest reserves in Mexico. . Fungal Divers. 
 12, 67–110. .  Lawrence, J.F., Newton, A.F., 1980. 
Coleoptera associated with the fruiting bodies of slime molds  (myxomycetes). . Coelopt  Bull  34, 129–143. .  Lesaulnier, C., Papamichail, D., McCorkle, S., Ollivier, B., Skiena, S., Taghavi, S., Zak, D., van  der Lelie, D., 2008. 
Elevated atmospheric CO2 affects soil microbial diversity associated with  trembling aspen. . Environ  Microbiol  10, 926–941. .  Levins, R., 1968. . Evolution in Changing Environments: Some Theoretical Explorations. 
Princeton  University Press, Princeton, NJ. .  Lindley, L.A., Stephenson, S.L., Spiegel, F.W., 2007. 
Protostelids and myxomycetes isolated from  aquatic habitats. . Mycologia 99, 504–509. .  Lister, A., 1901. 
On the cultivation of Mycetozoa from spores. . J  Bot  39, 5–8   Lister, G., 1915. 
Japanese mycetozoa. . Trans  Br  Mycol  Soc  5, 67–84   Lister, G., 1938. . The Revd  William Cran and his scientific work. 
J  Bot  76, 319–327. .  Lister, A., Lister, G., 1925. 
A Monograph of the Mycetozoa: A Descriptive Catalogue of the Species  in the Herbarium of the British Museum, third ed. . Trustees of the British Museum, London. .  Liu, P., Wang, Q., Li, Y., 2010. 
Spore-to-spore agar culture of the myxomycete Physarum globu- liferum. . Arch  Microbiol  192, 97–101. .  Madelin, M.F., 1984a. 
Myxomycete data of ecological significance. . Trans  Br  Mycol  Soc  83, 1–19   Madelin, M.F., 1984b. . Myxomycetes,microorganisms and animals: a model of diversity in animal- microbial ineractions. 
In: Anderson, J.M., Rayner, A.D.M., Walton, D.W.H. . (Eds.), Inverte- brate-Microbial Interactions. . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. . 1–33   Madelin, M.F., 1990. 
Methods for studying the ecology and population dynamics of soil myxomy- cetes. . Methods Microbiol. 
22, 405–416. .  Magurran, A.E., 2004. . Measuring Biological Diversity. . Blackwell, Malden. .  Maimoni-Rodella, R.C., Gottsberger, G., 1980. 
Myxomycetes from the forest and the Cerrado veg- etation in Botucatu, Brazil: a comparative ecological study. . Nova Hedwigia 34, 207–245. .  Marchal, E., 1895. . Champignons coprophile de Belgique. 
VII  Bull  Soc  R  Bot  Belg  34, 125–149. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Martin, M.P., Lado, C., Johansen, S., 2003. 
Primers are designed for amplification and direct se- quencing of ITS region of rDNA from myxomycetes. . Mycologia 95, 474–479. .  McCune, B., Mefford, M.J., 2006. . PC-ORD  Multivariate Analysis of Ecological Data, Version 4.0. 
 MjM Software Design, Gleneden Beach, OR. . McHugh, R., 1998. 
Corticolous myxomycetes from Glen Mhuire, Co. . Wicklow  Mycologist 12,  166–168. .  McHugh, R., 2005. 
Moist chamber culture and field collections of myxomycetes from Ecuador. .  Mycotaxon 92, 107–118. .  Mitchell, D.W., 1977. 
The bark myxomycetes—their collection, culture and identification. . School  Sci. . Rev  58, 444–455. .  Mitchell, D.W., 1978. 
A key to the corticolous myxomycetes part II. . Bull  Br  Mycol  Soc  12,  90–107. .  Moore, D.L., Stephenson, S.L., 2003. 
Microhabitat distribution of protostelids in a tropical wet for- est in Costa Rica. . Mycologia 95, 11–18. .  292     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Morris. .  E K    Caruso   T    Buscot   F    Fischer   M    Hancock   C    Maier   T S    Meiners   T    Müller    C    Obermaier. .  E    Prati   D    Socher   S A    Sonnemann. .  I    Wäschke   N    Wubet   T    Wurst   S     Rillig   M C    2014  Choosing and using diversity indices: insights for ecological applications  from the German Biodiversity Exploratories. 
Ecol  Evol  4, 3514–3524. .  Mosquera, J., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Beltrán Tejera, C., 2003. . Description and culture of a  new Myxomycete, Licea succulenticola. 
Anales Jard. . Bot  Madrid 60, 3–10. 
 Müller, H.T., Hoppe, T., Ferchen, T., 2008. . Notizen über einen aquatischen Schleimpilz. 
DATZ 61,  80–81. .  Ndiritu, G.G., Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2009. 
Distribution and ecology of the assemblages  of myxomycetes associated with major vegetation types in Big Bend National Park. . Fungal  Ecol. 
2, 168–183. .  Newton, A.F.S., Stephenson, S.L., 1990. 
A beetle/slime mold assemblange from Northern India  (Coleoptera; myxomycetes). . Orient  Insects 24, 197–218. .  Nordén, B., Ryberg, M., Götmark, F., Olausson, B., 2004. 
Relative importance of coarse and fine  woody debris for the diversity of wood-inhabiting fungi in temperate broadleaf forests. . Biol   Conserv  117, 1–10   Novozhilov, Y.K., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Schnittler, M., Aleksandrova, A.V., Popov, E.S.,  Kuznetsov, A.N., 2017a. . Myxomycetes associated with monsoon lowland tropical forests in  southern Vietnam. . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 143–182. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Mitchell, D.W., Schnittler, M., 2003. 
Myxomycete biodiversity of the Colorado  Plateau. . Mycol  Prog  2, 243–258. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Okun, M.V., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., García- Carvajal, E., Schnittler, M., 2013a. 
Description, culture and phylogenetic position of a new  xerotolerant species of Physarum. . Mycologia 105, 1535–1546. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 1997. . Nivicole myxomycetes of the Khibine mountains (Kola  peninsula). 
Nordic J  Bot  16, 549–561. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2000. 
A new coprophilous species of Perichaena (myxomyce- tes) from the Russian Arctic (the Taimyr Peninsula and the Chukchi Peninsula). . Karstenia 40,  117–122. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity and ecology in arid regions of the  Great Lake Basin of western Mongolia. . Fungal Divers. 
30, 97–119. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Okun, M.V., Schepin, O.N., Heinrich, E., 2013b. 
 Diversity of nivicolous myxomycetes of the Teberda State Biosphere Reserve (Northwestern  Caucasus, Russia). . Fungal Divers. 
59, 109–130. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., 2017b. . Myxomycetes of the Sikhote- Alin State Nature Biosphere Reserve (Far East, Russia). . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 183–209. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Rollins, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2001. 
Myxomycetes in different  forest types in Puerto Rico. . Mycotaxon 77, 285–299. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of the Taimyr Peninsula  (north-central Siberia). . Karstenia 39, 77–97. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Vlasenko, A.V., Fefelov, K.A., 2010. 
Myxomycete diversity of the  Altay Mts. . (southwestern Siberia, Russia). . Mycotaxon 111, 91–94. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Zemlianskaia, I.V., Fefelov, K.A., 2000. 
Biodiversity of plasmo- dial slime moulds (Myxogastria): measurement and interpretation. . Protistology 1, 161–178. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Zemlyanskaya, I., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2006. 
Myxomycete diversity and  ecology in the arid regions of the Lower Volga River Basin (Russia). . Fungal Divers. 
23, 193–241. .  Nyberg, A., Persoon, I.-L., 2002. . Habitat differences of coprophilous fungi on moose dung. 
Mycol   Res  106, 1360–1366. .  Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    293 Ohlson, M., Söderström, L., Hörnberg, G., Zackrisson, O., 1997. . Habitat qualities versus long-term  continuity as determinants of biodiversity in boreal old-growth swamp forests. 
Biol  Conserv   81, 221–231. .  Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., Minchin, P.R.,  O’Hara, R.B., Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Stevens, M.H.H., Szoecs, E., Wagner, H., 2016. 
 Community Ecology Package “Vegan,” 2.4-0 ed. . Available from: https://cran.r-project.org,  https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan Ostrofsky, A., Shigo, A.L., 1981. 
A myxomycete isolated from discolored wood of living red maple. .  Mycologia 73, 997–1000. .  Pando, F., 1989. 
Un estudio sobre los myxomycetes corticolas de la isla de Mallorca. . Anales Jard. .  Bot  Madrid 46, 181–188. .  Pando, F., Lodo, C., 1987. 
Myxomycetes corticicolas ibericos, I: especies sobre Juniperus thurifera. .  Bol  Soc  Micol  Madrid 11, 203–212. .  Parker, H., 1946. 
Studies in the nutrition of some aquatic Myxomycetes. . J  Elisha Mitchell Sci. . Soc   62, 231–247. .  Pendergrass, L., 1976. 
Further studies on corticolous myxomycetes from within the city limits of  Atlanta, Georgia. . Department of Biology, Atlanta University, Atlanta, p. . 136  Penfound, W.T., 1940. 
A note concerning the relation between drainage pattern, bark conditions,  and the distribution of corticolous bryophytes. . Bryologist 43, 169–170. .  Peterson, J.E., 1952. 
Myxomycetes developed on bark of living trees in moist chamber culture. .  Master thesis, Michigan State College, East Lansing, MI, p. 
104  Pianka, E.R., 1973. . The structure of lizard communities. . Ann  Rev  Ecol  Syst  4, 53–74   Renvall, P., 1995. . Community structure and dynamics of wood-rotting Basidiomycetes on decom- posing conifer trunks in northern Finland. 
Karstenia 35, 1–51. .  Rodríguez-Palma, M., Varela-Garcia, A., Lado, C., 2002. 
Corticolous myxomycetes associated with  four tree species in Mexico. . Mycotaxon 81, 345–355. .  Rojas, C., Doss, R.G., 2014. 
Does habitat loss affect tropical myxomycetes. . Mycosphere 5, 692–700. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S.L., 2007. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in the high-elevation  oak forests of Cerro Bellavista, Costa Rica. . Mycologia 99, 534–543. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S., 2013. 
Effect of forest disturbance on myxomycete assemblages in the  southwestern Peruvian Amazon. . Fungal Divers. . 59, 45–53   Rojas, C., Schnittler, M., Biffi, D., Stephenson, S.L., 2008. 
Microhabitat and niche separation in  species of Ceratiomyxa. . Mycologia 100, 843–850. .  Rojas, C., Valverde, R., 2015. 
Ecological patterns of lignicolous myxomycetes from two different  forest types in Costa Rica. . Nova Hedwigia 101, 21–34. .  Rojas, C., Valverde, R., Stephenson, S.L., Vargas, M.J., 2010. 
Ecological patterns of Costa Rican  myxomycetes. . Fungal Ecol. 
3, 139–147. .  Rollins, A.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2012. 
Myxogastrid distribution within the leaf litter microhabitat. .  Mycosphere 3, 543–549. .  Rollins, A., Stephenson, S., 2013. 
Myxomycetes associated with grasslands of the western central  United States. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 147–158. .  Ronikier, A., Ronikier, M., 2009. 
How “alpine” are nivicolous myxomycetes? A worldwide assess- ment of altitudinal distribution. . Mycologia 101, 1–16. .  Rufino, M.U.L., Cavalcanti, L.H., 2007. 
Alterations in the lignicolous myxomycete biota over two  decades at the Dois Irmãos Ecologic State Reserve, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. . Fungal Divers. 
 24, 159–171. .  Samuelsson, J., Gustafsson, L., Ingelög, T., 1994. 
Dying and Dead Trees: A Review of Their Impor- tance for Biodiversity. . Art Databanken, Upsala. 
 294     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Schnittler, M., 2001a. . Ecology of Myxomycetes of a winter-cold desert in western Kazakhstan. 
 Mycologia 93, 653–669. .  Schnittler, M., 2001b. 
Foliicolous liverworts as a microhabitat for neotropical myxomycetes. . Nova  Hedwigia 72, 259–270. .  Schnittler, M., Dagamac, N.H.A., Sauke, M., Wilmking, M., Buras, A., Ahlgrimm, S., Eusemann,  P., 2016. 
Ecological factors limiting occurrence of corticolous myxomycetes—a case study  from Alaska. . Fungal Ecol. . 21, 16–23   Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Heinrich, E., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2015a. 
Four years  in the Caucasus—observations on the ecology of nivicolous myxomycetes. . Fungal Ecol. 
14,  105–115. .  Schnittler, M., Lado, C., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Rapid biodiversity assessment of a tropical  myxomycete assemblage—Maquipucuna Cloud Forest Reserve, Ecuador. . Fungal Divers. 
9,  135–167. .  Schnittler, M., Mitchell, D.W., 2000. . Species diversity in Myxomycetes based on the morphological  species concept: a critical examination. 
Stapfia 73, 55–61. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 1996. . The myxomycetes of boreal woodlands in Russian northern  Karelia: a preliminary report. 
Karstenia 36, 19–40. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 1998. 
Late-autumn myxomycetes of the northern Ammergauer  Alps. . Nova Hedwigia 66, 205–222. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2000. 
Myxomycetes of the winter-cold desert in western Kazakh- stan. . Mycotaxon 74, 267–285. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Carvajal, E., Spiegel, F.W., 2013. 
Myxomycete diversity in the  Tarim basin and eastern Tian-Shan, Xinjiang Prov., China. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 91–108. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Romeralo, M., Brown, M., Spiegel, F.W., 2012. . Fruit body-form- ing protists: myxomycetes and myxomycete-like organisms (Acrasia, Eumycetozoa). 
In: Frey,  W. . (Ed.), Engler’s Syllabus of Plant Families, Part 1/1. . Blue-Green Algae, Myxomycetes and  Myxomycete-Like Organisms, Phytoparasitic Protists, Heterotrophic Heterokontobionta and  Fungi. 
thirteenth ed. . Bornträger, Stuttgart, pp. . 40–88   Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Shadwick, J.D.L., Spiegel, F.W., García-Carvajal, E., König, P.,  2015b. 
What substrate cultures can reveal: myxomycetes and myxomycete-like organisms from  the Sultanate of Oman. . Mycosphere 6, 356–384. .  Schnittler, M., Shchepin, O.N., Dagamac, N.H.A., Borg Dahl, M., Novozhilov, Yu, K., 2017. . Bar- coding myxomycetes with molecular markers: challenges and opportunities. 
Nova Hedwigia  104 (1–3), 323–341. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2000. 
Myxomycete biodiversity in four different forest types in  Costa Rica. . Mycologia 92, 626–637. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Inflorescences of neotropical herbs as a newly discovered  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 94, 6–20. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2000. 
Ecology and world distribution of Bar- beyella minutissima (Myxomycetes). . Mycol  Res  104, 1518–1523. .  Schnittler, M., Unterseher, M., Pfeiffer, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Fiore-Donno, A.-M., 2010. 
Ecology  of sandstone ravine myxomycetes from Saxonian Switzerland (Germany). . Nova Hedwigia 90,  277–302. .  Schnittler, M., Unterseher, M., Tesmer, J., 2006. 
Species richness and ecological characterization of  myxomycetes and myxomycete-like organisms in the canopy of a temperate deciduous forest. .  Mycologia 98, 223–232. .  Schnitzer, S.A., Bongers, F., 2002. . The ecology of lianas and their role in forests. 
Trends Ecol. . Evol   17, 223–230. 
 Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    295 Shadwick, J.D., Stephenson, S.L., Spiegel, F.W., 2009. . Distribution and ecology of protostelids in  Great Smoky Mountains National Park. 
Mycologia 101, 320–328. .  Shchepin, O.N., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2014. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes in agar culture:  some results and open problems. . Protistology 8, 53–61. 
 Shearer, C.A., Crane, J.L., 1986. . Illinois fungi XII. . Fungi and myxomycetes from wood and leaves  submerged in southern Illinois swamps. . Mycotaxon 25, 527. .  Sherman, J.M., 1916. 
Studies on soil protozoa and their relation to the bacterial flora. . II  J  Bacte- riol. . 1, 165–185. .  Siitonen, J., 2001. . Forest management, coarse woody debris and saproxylic organisms: fennoscan- dian boreal forests as an example. 
Ecol  Bull  49, 11–41   Snell, K.L., Keller, H.W., 2003. . Vertical distribution and assemblages of corticolous myxomycetes  on fire tree species in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. . Mycologia 95, 565–576. .  Snell, K.L., Keller, H.W., Eliasson, U.H., 2003. . Tree canopy myxomycetes and new records from  ground sites in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. 
Castanea 68, 97–108. .  Soberón, J., 2007. 
Grinnellian and Eltonian niches and geographic distributions of species. . Ecol   Lett  10, 1115–1123. .  Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., Keller, H.W., Moore, D.L., Cavender, J.C., 2004. . Mycetozoans. . In:  Mueller, G.M., Bills, G.F., Foster, M.S. 
(Eds.), Biodiversity of Fungi: Inventory and Monitoring  Methods. . Elsevier Academic Press, Amsterdam, pp. . 547–576   Stephenson, S.L., 1985. 
Slime molds in the laboratory II: moist chamber culture. . Am  Biol  Teach   47, 487–489. .  Stephenson, S.L., 1988. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests I. . Patterns of  occurence in the upland forests of southwestern Virginia. 
Can  J  Bot  66, 2187–2207. .  Stephenson, S.L., 1989. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests. . II  Patterns  of occurence on bark surface of living trees, leaf litter, and dung. 
Mycologia 81, 608–621. .  Stephenson, S.L., 2011. 
From morphological to molecular: studies of myxomycetes since the publi- cation of the Martin and Alexopoulos (1969) monograph. . Fungal Divers. . 50, 21–34   Stephenson, S.L., Estrada-Torres, A., Schnittler, M., Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Ogata, N.,  2003. . Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in the forests of Yucatan. 
In: Gomez-Pompa,  A., Allen, M.F., Fedick, S.L., Jiménez-Osornio, J.J. . (Eds.), The Lowland Maya Area. . Three  Millenia at the Human-Wildland Interface. 
Food Products Press, New York, NY, pp. . 241–259   Stephenson, S.L., Feest, A., 2012. 
Ecology of soil eumycetozoans. . Acta Protozool. . 51, 201–208. .  Stephenson, S.L., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Schnittler, M., 2011. 
Myxomycetes in soil. . Soil Biol  Bio- chem  43, 2237–2242. .  Stephenson, S.L., Kalyanasundaram, I., Lakhanpal, T.N., 1993. 
A comparative biogeographical  study of myxomycetes in the mid-Appalachians of eastern North America and two regions of  India. . J  Biogeogr  20, 645–657. .  Stephenson, S.L., Landolt, J.C., 1996. 
The vertical distribution of dictyostelids and myxomycetes in  the soil/litter microhabitat. . Nova Hedwigia 62, 105–117. .  Stephenson, S.L., Landolt, J., 2015. 
Occurrence of myxomycetes in the aerial “canopy soil” micro- habitat. . Mycosphere 6, 74–77. .  Stephenson, S.L., Landolt, J.C., Moore, D.L., 1999. 
Protostelids, dictyostelids, and myxomycetes  in the litter microhabitat of the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico. . Mycol  Res  103,  209–214. .  Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2000. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes  in high-latitude regions of the northern hemisphere. . J  Biogeogr  27, 741–754. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., Lado, C., 2004a. 
Ecological characterization of a tropical myxo- mycete assemblage—Maquipucuna Cloud Forest Reserve. . Ecuador  Mycol  96, 488–497. 
 296     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Stephenson. .  S L    Schnittler. .  M    Lado   C    Estrada-Torres. .  A    Wrigley de Basanta. .  D    Landolt    J C    Novozhilov. 
 Y K    Clark   J    Moore   D L    Spiegel   F W    2004b  Studies of neotropical  mycetozoans. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 87–108. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press,  Portland, OR. .  Stephenson, S.L., Studlar, S.M., 1985. . Myxomycetes fruiting upon bryophytes: coincidence or pref- erence. . J  Bryol  13, 537   Stephenson, S.L., Urban, L., Rojas, C., McDonald, M., 2008. 
Myxomycetes associated with woody  twigs. . Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 21–28   Stojanowska, W., 1980a. . Comparison of myxomycetes of the forest in Skarszyn and of the beech  reserve in Muszkowice. . Acta Mycol. 
16, 221, [in Polish, with English summary]. .  Stojanowska, W., 1980b. 
The seasonal variation of myxomycetes flora in the Muszkowicki Las  Bukowy reserve (Lower Silesia). . Fragm  Flor  Geobot  26, 103–113, [in Polish, with English  summary]. .  Sun, H., Santalahtia, M., Pumpanen, J., Köster, K., Berninger, F., Raffaello, T., Jumpponen, A.,  Asiegbu, F.O., Heinonsalo, J., 2015. 
Fungal community shifts in structure and function across a  boreal forest fire chronosequence. . Appl  Environ  Microbiol  81, 7869–7880. .  Sunhede, S., 1973. 
Studies in myxomycetes. . I  On the growth and ecology of the myxomycete  Relicularia lycoperdon. 
Svensk Bot. . Tidskr  67, 172–176. .  Takahashi, K., 1995. . An ecology of myxomycetes in secondary forests of coastal areas in Okayama  Prefecture—regarding substratum and seasonal changes of myxomycetes. . Bull  Okayama Pref. 
 Nat  Conserv  Center 3, 23–31. .  Takahashi, K., 2001. . Ocurrence of lignicolous myxomycetes and their association with the decaying  state of coniferous wood in sub-alpine forests of Central Japan. 
Asahi Bull. . 22, 3–15   Takahashi, K., 2004. 
Occurence of myxomycetes on different decay states of decidouos broadleaf  and coniferous wood in a natural temperate forest at southwest of Japan. . Syst  Geogr  Plants  74, 133–142. .  Takahashi, K., Hada, Y., 2008. . Seasonal change in the species composition and dominant species  of myxomycete communities on dead wood of Pinus densiflora in a warm temperate forest. 
 Hikobia 15, 145–154. .  Takahashi, K., Hada, Y., 2009. 
Distribution of myxomycetes on coarse woody debris of Pinus  densiflora at different decay stages in secondary forests of western Japan. . Mycoscience 50,  253–260. .  Takahashi, K., Harakon, Y., 2012. 
Comparison of wood-inhabiting myxomycetes in subalpine and  montane coniferous forests in the Yatsugatake Mountains of Central Japan. . J  Plant Res  125,  327–337. .  Tamayama, M., Keller, H.W., 2013. 
Aquatic myxomycetes. . FUNGI 6, 18–24. .  Taylor, K.M., Feest, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
The occurrence of myxomycetes in wood. . Fungal  Ecol. 
17, 179–182. .  Ter Braak, C.J.F., 1987. 
The analysis of vegetation-environment relationships by canonical corre- spondence analysis. . Vegetatio 69, 69–77. .  ter Braak, C.J.F., Verdonschot, P.E.M., 1995. 
Canonical correspondence analysis and related multi- variate methods in aquatic ecology. . Aquat  Sci  57, 255–289. .  Thomas, P., Packham, J., 2007. 
Ecology of Woodlands and Forests. . Description, Dynamics and  Diversity. . Cambridge University Press, New York, NY. 
 Tiunov, A.V., Semenina, E.S., Aleksandrova, A.V., Tsurikov, S.M., Anichkin, A.E., Novozhilov,  Y.K., 2015. . Stable isotope composition (δ13C and δ15N values) of slime molds: placing bac- terivorous soil protozoans in the food web context. 
Rapid Commun. . Mass Spectrom. 
29, 1–8   Ecology and Distribution of Myxomycetes  Chapter | 8    297 Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Mongkolporn, O., 2006. . Distribution and occurrence  of myxomycetes in tropical forests of northern Thailand. . Fungal Divers. 
22, 227–242. .  Unterseher, M., Otto, P., Morawetz, W., 2005. 
Species richness and substrate specificity of lignico- lous fungi in the canopy of a temperate, mixed deciduous forest. . Mycol  Prog  4, 117–132. .  Unterseher, M., Schnittler, M., Dormann, C., Sickert, A., 2008. 
Application of species richness esti- mators for the assessment of fungal diversity. . FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett  282, 205–213. .  Urich, T., Lanzén, A., Qi, J., Huson, D.H., Schleper, C., Schuster, S.C., 2008. 
Simultaneous as- sessment of soil microbial community structure and function through analysis of the meta- transcriptome. . PLoS One, e2527. .  Vlasenko, A.V., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2011. 
Phenological features of myxomycetes in pine forests of  the right-bank of the Upper Ob’ River. . Plant World of Asian Russia 2, 3–9, [in Russian]. .  Vorˇíšková, J., Baldrian, P., 2013. . Fungal community on decomposing leaf litter undergoes rapid  successional changes. 
ISME J  7, 477–486. .  Warcup, J., 1950. 
The soil plate method for the isolation of fungi from soil. . Nature 166, 117–118. .  Ward, M.H., 1886. 
The morphology and physiology of an aquatic myxomycete. . Q  J  Microsc  Sci   24, 64–86. .  Wheeler, Q.D., 1980. 
Studies in neotropical slime mold/beetle relationships, part I: natural history  and description of a new species of Anisotoma from Panama (Coleoptera: Leiodidae). . Proc   Entomol  Soc  Wash  82, 493–498. .  Whittaker, R.H., 1965. 
Dominance and diversity in plant communities. . Science 147, 250–260. .  Whittaker, R.H., Levin, S.A., Root, R.B., 1973. 
Niche, habitat, and ecotope. . Am  Nat  107, 321–338. .  Wikmark, O.G., Haugen, P., Haugli, K., Johansen, S.D., 2007a. 
Obligatory group I introns with un- usual features at positions 1949 and 2449 in nuclear LSU rDNA of Didymiaceae myxomycetes. .  Mol  Phylogenet. . Evol  43, 596–604. .  Wikmark, O.G., Haugen, P., Lundblad, E.W., Haugli, K., Johansen, S.D., 2007b. 
The molecular  evolution and structural organization of group I introns at position 1389 in nuclear small sub- unit rDNA of myxomycetes. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  54, 49–56   Wilson, J.B., 1991. . Methods for fitting dominance/diversity curves. . J  Veg  Sci  2, 35–46   Wrigley de Basanta, D., 1998. . Myxomycetes from the bark of the evergreen oak Quercus ilex. 
 Anales Jar. . Bot  Madrid 56, 3–14. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2000. . Acid deposition in Madrid and corticolous myxomycetes. 
Stapfia  73, 113. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2004. 
The effect of simulated acid rain on corticolous myxomycetes. . Syst   Geogr  Plants 74, 175–181. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Stephenson, S.L., Estrada-Torres, A., 2002. . Myxomycetes  from moist chamber cultures of neotropical substrates. 
In: Rammeloo, J., Bogaerts, A. . (Eds.),  Fourth International Congress on Systematics and Ecology of Myxomycetes. . National Botanic  Garden, Brussels, p. 
100   Wrigley de Basanta, D., Stephenson, S.L., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Nieves-Rivera, A.M., 2008. .  Lianas as a microhabitat for myxomycetes in tropical forests. . Fungal Divers. 
28, 109–125. .  Yang, Z., Liu, X., Zhou, M., Ai, D., Wang, G., Wang, Y., Chu, C., Lundholm, J.T., 2015. 
The effect  of environmental heterogeneity on species richness depends on community position along the  environmental gradient. . Sci  Rep  5, 15723   Zahn, G., Stephenson, S.L., Spiegel, F.W., 2014. . Ecological distribution of protosteloid amoebae in  New Zealand. 
PeerJ 2, e296. .  Page left intentionally blank 299 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00009-3 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. . Chapter 9 Biogeographical Patterns  in Myxomycetes Martin Schnittler*, Nikki Heherson A. 
Dagamac*, Yuri K. . Novozhilov** *Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology, Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, Greifswald,  Germany; **Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, St. 
Petersburg. .  Russia INTRODUCTION Only a very few major lineages of life. .  namely the Metazoa (animals). .   Embryophyta (terrestrial plants). .  and Eumycota (some Ascomycetes and Basid- iomycetes) evolved into truly multicellular. .  macroscopic organisms. 
Myxomy- cetes are a significant exception among protists due to their noncellular fruiting  bodies. .  which are not formed out of a growth process but by reformation of  the second vegetative stage. 
 the plasmodium. . Their mostly macroscopic fruiting  bodies are the precondition to colonize habitat islands. .  characterized by a local- ly higher density of other microorganisms serving as prey. .  by spores (Schnittler  and Tesmer. 
 2008)  Understanding dispersal ecology and speciation patterns in  the group is the key to understand and describe species distribution and diversity  patterns. . Spore Dispersal as a Key Feature for Myxomycetes Among protists, myxomycetes are unique for their multinucleate and macroscop- ic plasmodia but not in dispersing by spores. . Stalked fruiting bodies that release  airborne spores evolved independently in several protistean groups, character- ized by similarities in their life style (i.e., predators of other microbes). 
These  groups can be seen as an ecological guild (myxomycetes and myxomycete-like  organisms, Schnittler et al., 2006). . If the myxobacteria (Reichenbach, 1993)  are considered, this would even include a group of prokaryotes. . All Eumyceto- zoans [dictyostelids (Romeralo et al.. 
 2010   2011; Swanson et al.. .  2002)]   the  isolated genus Ceratiomyxa (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2010)   and the myxomycetes  (Schnittler et al.. 
 2012; Stephenson and Schnittler. .  2016) form primarily stalked  fruiting bodies. . Quite heterogenous and paraphyletic protistean groups dispers- ing via spores are the protosteliid (Spiegel et al.. .  2004)   and acrasiid amoebae  300     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology (Brown et al.. 
 2012)  Surprisingly, even a genus within Ciliata [Sorogena  (Bardele et al., 1991)] develops stalked fruiting bodies that release spores. .  These cases of parallel evolution can be seen as evidence that the terrestrial life  style required an efficient means of dispersal. 
 since metabolically active cells  are easily transported by water but not by air due to the danger of desiccation. .  The obvious solution are spores, being simultaneously dormant and transport  stages. . Spores in the guild range from 1 to 3 µm (prokaryotic myxobacteria with  a much smaller genome) over (3−)5–8 µm in dictyostelids, (4)7–12(−20) µm  in myxomycetes to ca. . 35 µm in Sorogena, where the spores transport a micro-  and a macronucleus as it is typical for ciliates. 
Spore size is the first critical parameter for dispersal, determining largely the  terminal (sedimentation) velocity of spores in still air. . For myxomycetes, fig- ures between 1 mm/s (spore size ca. . 7 µm) and 3 mm/s (12 µm) were reported  by Tesmer and Schnittler (2007) and Schnittler et al. . (2006)  These values corre- late well with figures calculated employing Stokes’ law (predicting the terminal  velocity of small spherical bodies). .  and if this holds true. 
 spore size should be  under strong selective pressure. .  since a spore of Trichia varia (mean diameter  13.0 µm) falls about four times faster than one of Stemonitis axifera (mean  diameter 6.3 µm). . Consequently, species with smaller spores should achieve  higher dispersal abilities. . The second critical parameter for dispersal is the starting point of a spore. 
  determined mostly by the ability of myxomycete plasmodia to react positively  phototropic as soon as the point of no return for the conversion of the plasmo- dial biomass into fruiting bodies is reached. . As such, aerial habitats, such as the  tree canopy (Schnittler et al., 2006; Snell et al., 2003) are especially effective  for myxomycete dispersal. . Since the trophic stages of myxomycetes. 
 amoebo- flatellates. .  and plasmodia. 
 both require liquid water for active growth and move- ment. .  fruiting bodies often develop on substrates covered by a film of water. 
 Taking this into consideration. .  the lengths of 0.5–3 mm typically achieved by  the stalks of myxomycete fruiting bodies make a difference. .  since they elevate  the spore case above the water film. .  allowing the spores to dry out and become  airborne. . Coinciding with these considerations, stalked fruiting bodies are an  ancestral character for myxomycetes (Fiore-Donno et al., 2010). . Stalk length. 
  taking away resources from the developing plasmodium. .  seems to be under se- lective pressure; widely distributed species of myxomycetes seem to develop  longer stalks in tropical regions (Stephenson et al.. .  2004   2008)  In periodically  dry environments. .  such as the bark surface of living trees. 
 in addition to stalked  species with a short development time. .  a second strategy can be seen—species  developing more slowly with more robust. 
 sessile fruiting bodies. .  which open  in dry periods (Schnittler. 
 2001)  An additional dispersal strategy includes animal vectors, often invertebrates. .  Among the Coleoptera, the genera Anisotoma and Agathidium are specialized in  feeding on myxomycete fruiting bodies (Blackwell et al., 1982; Wheeler, 1984). .  Other recorded observations of animals dispersing myxomycete spores  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    301 include Diptera (Buxton. 
 1954)   Collembola (Chassain. .  1973)   acarids (Keller  and Smith. .  1978)   tartigrades (Kylin. .  1991)   various earthworms (Murray  et al.. .  1985)   slugs (Keller and Snell. 
 2002)   and nematodes (Kilgore and  Keller. .  2008)  In addition, birds (Sutherland, 1979), as well as lizards (Townsend  et al., 2005) have been observed to disperse myxomycetes. 
Dispersal of spores  by water cannot be ruled out. .  since experiments have confirmed observations  that myxomycetes may fruit and produce viable spores in submerged conditions  (Lindley et al.. 
 2007; Vlasenko et al.. .  2016)  Whereas most species of myxomycete develop colonies of stalked but sepa- rated fruiting bodies. .  about 10% of all species develop compound fruiting bod- ies. 
 which can reach a considerable size (in Brefeldia maxima up to 1m). . Some  of these fruiting bodies mimic puffballs (raindrop ballists; Dixon. .  1963)   and  like some gasteromycetes the spores of these genera (Lycogala. 
 Reticularia. .   Tubifera) possess a reticulum of elevated ridges. 
 making them extremely hydro- phobic (Hoppe and Schwippert. .  2014)  Species with compound fruiting bodies  rely more on animal vectors (Fuligo and Symphytocarpus) seem to have less  hydrophobic spores, ornamented by warts or spines. . Smaller compound fruiting  bodies may be fascicle-stalked (Arcyria cinerea var. . digitata and Alwisia bom- barda), whereas large compound fruiting bodies (exceeding 2 cm diam.) are  always sessile (Fuligo spp. . and Tubifera spp.). . The transition from solitary to  compound fruiting bodies occurred in several lineages independently (Leontyev  et al., 2015). 
The third parameter important for dispersal is spore ornamentation, enhanc- ing the hydrophobicity of spores. . A high hydrophobicity will enable spores to  become airborne again, even from wet surfaces, although no quantitative data  are yet available for this secondary dispersal. . Only a very few species of myxo- mycetes possess completely smooth spores. 
Noteworthy are some coprophilous  species, which fruit on herbivore dung. . Their thick-walled spores seem to be  adapted to passage through the digestive tract of herbivorous animals (Eliasson  and Lundqvist, 1979). . Height of release, spore size, and ornamentation seem to be the three decisive  parameters for long-distance dispersal of spores. . Myxomycete spores have been  detected in the air (Kamono et al., 2009), but no quantitative dispersal mod- els have yet been developed for myxomycetes. . From experiments with fungal  spores (Penet et al.. .  2014) and pollen (Ottewell et al.. .  2012; Robledo-Arnuncio  and Gil. .  2005) of comparable sizes. 
 we can assume successful long-distance dis- persal but with leptokurtic dispersal curves (having a long “tail”). .  which enable  myxomycetes to reach distant habitat islands with a sufficiently high density of  microbes. . This was indirectly confirmed by surveys on remote islands. 
 which  revealed relatively diverse myxomycete assemblages [Macquarie Island. .  south  of Tasmania (Stephenson et al.. 
 2007); La Reunion (Adamonytė et al.. .  2011);  Papua New Guinea (Kylin et al.. .  2013); Bohol Island (Macabago et al.. .  2017);  and the occurrence of myxomycetes in the aerial woody debris and “canopy  soil” (Schnittler et al.. 
 2006; Stephenson and Landolt. .  2015) microhabitats. 
As  302     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology shown by model calculations. .  the successful colonization of such habitat islands  depends on the reproductive system of a species (Schnittler and Tesmer. .  2008)   Homothallic strains [presumably asexual (Clark and Haskins, 2013)] need only  a single spore to colonize a new habitat, whereas heterothallic (sexual) strains  require two compatible spores. . Since in addition to the formation of fruiting  bodies. 
 the predatory life style is another joint character of the guild of myxo- mycetes and myxomycete-like organisms. .  all of the groups of organisms men- tioned at the beginning of this text must be assumed to be locally distributed  (i.e.. .  confined to habitat islands. 
 such as decaying logs. .  accumulations of litter. .   or other decaying plant material that provide abundant microbial prey). 
MYXOMYCETE BIOGEOGRAPHY—WHAT CAN WE SEE? Due to their comparatively conspicuous fruiting bodies. .  myxomycetes were  “discovered” much earlier than most other protistean groups. 
 attracting the  attention of naturalists. .  including Linnaeus (1753) who described some species  as miniature puffballs—in an ecological sense. 
 he was not terribly wrong. . The  first major monograph of the group (Rostafinsky, 1875) recognized a significant  proportion of the ca. . 945 morphospecies known today (Lado, 2005). . Therefore,  we can look back on a history of nearly 200 years of records of fruiting bodies,  which has resulted in a significant body of data on myxomycete distribution. . However, it should be noted that this entire body of data is based only on  records of the fruiting bodies, not amoeboflagellates or plasmodia as the ac- tive life forms. . In this respect, we are like a gardener who wants to know the  distribution of apple trees in an orchard, but he can see only the apples, not the  trees. 
Small and nonfruiting trees under suboptimum conditions remain invis- ible for him. . Therefore, we must assume that we see nothing more than the  “tip of the iceberg”—myxomycete populations growing under optimum condi- tions that successfully fruit. . This might be especially true for soil myxomycetes  [see Stephenson et al. . (2011) for a review]. 
Amoeboflagellates of myxomycetes  were found to be the most abundant group of protists in a study based on ePCR  with mRNA sequences (Urich et al.. .  2008)   but fruiting bodies of myxomycetes  on bare soil are rarely reported; accumulations of litter with a higher number of  nutrients and thus microbes seem to be required for formation of fruiting bodies. 
 In addition. .  it cannot be ruled out that nonfruiting strains of myxomycetes do  exist in nature. .  because a loss of functionality in a single gene in the complex  ontogenesis of fruiting bodies may halt spore formation and thus severely inter- rupt dispersal abilities. .  similar to the loss of a stalk in the sessile Semimorula  liquescens. .  where molecular data suggest a close relationship to Echinostelium. 
  a genus forming long-stalked fruiting bodies (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2009)  There  is no reason to assume that nonfruiting strains cannot persist indefinitely as  populations of amoeboflatellates in soil, even if they lost the ability for long- distance dispersal via spores. . As such, we can expect that a species may often  have a larger range than indicated by records of fruiting bodies. 
This has been  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    303 shown to be the case for nivicolous myxomycetes. .  a peculiar group of soil inhab- iting myxomycetes. 
 which fruit in spring near melting snow banks (Schnittler  et al.. .  2015a)  Fruitings are abundant only in alpine situations (Ronikier and  Ronikier, 2009), which usually means mountains with a long-lasting contigu- ous snow cover. . However, two studies based on ePCR from the lowlands of  Germany (Fiore-Donno et al., 2016) and the lowlands of northwestern Russia  (Shchepin, Novozhilov pers. 
commun.) detected sequences of several nivico- lous species in areas where their fruiting bodies have never been found. . As such,  we must assume that a particular species of myxomycete may be more widely  distributed than indicated by records of fruiting bodies alone. . However, a second line of thinking points in the opposite direction. 
The  current species concept in myxomycetes is a morphological one, at least with  respect to our data on species distribution. . Another concept, though several de- cades old, found never its way into diversity research, since it relies on amoe- boflagellate compatibility. 
Early experiments. .  carried out mostly with culti- vable members of the Physarales. 
 demonstrated that a morphospecies might  include strains that are incompatible to each other. .  forming separate biospe- cies (Collins. 
 1979)  In addition, asexual (presumably diploid) strains may exist  (Clark and Haskins, 2013). . Therefore, one morphospecies may include several  cryptic biospecies. . Verifying this for a given morphospecies requires laborious  cultivation. .  but only a minor fraction of all myxomycetes (mostly members of  the Physarales) have been cultivated successfully from spore to spore. . The dif- ferent reproductive options and its consequences for species concepts are dis- cussed in Feng et al. 
(2016) and Walker and Stephenson (2016). . Molecular studies may be a tool for independent verification of the morpho- species concept. . In contrast to pathogenic protists. 
 where molecular research  was spurred by health arguments [e.g.. .  Entamoeba (García et al.. .  2014)]    myxomycetes are neither pathogenic nor of significant economic importance. 
 Therefore, molecular tools for species differentiation are still at an early state  of development, and the species concept in the group is entirely based on the  morphology of the fruiting bodies. . The first phylogenetic studies (Fiore-Donno  et al.. .  2005   2008   2010   2011   2012   2013) did not only challenge the clas- sical taxonomic concept of the group but also enabled researchers to develop  barcoding markers (Schnittler et al.. .  2017)  As in other protists, the 18S rRNA  gene (SSU), which is usually a multicopy gene (Torres-Machorro et al., 2010),  is the most promising candidate for such a barcode (Adl et al., 2014). . The first  studies employing barcodes [Badhamia melanospora (Aguilar et al., 2014)  and nivicolous myxomycetes (Novozhilov et al., 2013b)] always found several  ribotypes per morphospecies. . This was confirmed by other studies that used  additional markers, which enabled these authors to demonstrate cryptic specia- tion [T. 
varia (Feng and Schnittler, 2015), Meriderma spp. . (Feng et al., 2016),  and Hemitrichia serpula (Dagamac et al., 2017c)]. . In addition. 
 a first survey of  wood inhabiting. .  bright-spored myxomycetes (Feng and Schnittler. 
 2017) es- timated a relation between morphospecies and ribotypes of 1:2 to 1:10. .  which  304     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology points to a considerable amount of cryptic speciation. . In other words. 
 the cur- rent morphospecies concept is very likely underestimating diversity. .  in spite  of the steep increase in newly described morphospecies within the past few  decades (Schnittler and Mitchell. .  2000)  In addition. 
 two studies tracing the  worldwide distribution of a morphospecies based on the distribution of its ribo- types (Aguilar et al.. .  2014; Dagamac et al.. .  2017c) found ribotypes. 
 constituting  putative cryptic species. .  to be more limited in distribution than the morphospe- cies as a whole. . This provides evidence for a contrasting hypothesis that many  morphospecies may in fact be complexes of cryptic species showing more lim- ited distribution patterns than the morphospecies as a whole. . Biogeographic Hypotheses About Myxomycete Distribution The considerations mentioned earlier have to be taken into account for the dis- cussion of two controversial hypotheses that are used to explain biogeographic  patterns in myxomycetes. . Similar to the situation in other protists. .  the Baas- Becking model of ubiquity (Bass and Boenigk. 
 2011; Finlay. .  2002; Finlay and  Clarke. .  1999) was opposed by the moderate endemicity model (Foissner. 
 1999)   The first model argues that the ability of protists to have almost unlimited dispersal  due to their small cell (spore) sizes causes them to be found everywhere (Finlay  et al.. .  2004); geographical barriers should not limit distribution (Finlay. .  2002)  In  this case, only habitat suitability will limit the occurrence of a protist species in a  certain region. . The second model claims that some protists may be cosmopolitan  but others show geographically restricted distribution patterns (Foissner. 
 2006) and  still others may even be endemic for a particular locality (Cotterill et al.. .  2008;  Martiny et al.. 
 2006)  These models attenuate the tenet of “everything is every- where” by proposing that (1) the abundances and thus the migration rates are rather  low for the majority of species. .  (2) extinction rates are moderate. .  and (3) the pro- portion of the global species pool found locally is moderate. 
Indeed, for ciliates,  a group usually not dispersing by spores, about 30% of the species were found to  be regionally endemic (Foissner, 2008). . Thus far   local endemicity has not been  reported for myxomycetes. .  and even surveys on remote archipelagos have not  revealed endemic taxa at the morphospecies level [Galapagos Islands (Eliasson  and Nannenga-Bremekamp. 
 1983); the Hawaiian archipelago (Eliasson. .  1991);  Palawan Island (Pecundo et al.. 
 2017)]  Regional endemicity may occur in  some species. . Possible examples include species recently described from des- erts. .  such as Physarum pseudonotabile in Central Asian deserts (Novozhilov and  Schnittler. .  2008; Novozhilov et al.. .  2013a)   or Perichaena calongei. 
 Didymium in- fundibuliforme. .  and Physarum atacamense in South America (Araujo et al.. .  2015;  Lado et al.. .  2009; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2009   2012)  More systematic surveys  are needed to determine if these species truly represent cases of regional endemic- ity or simply appear so due to a lack of data from other regions. . Whereas already rare dispersal events are sufficient to colonize new and re- mote localities. .  regular dispersal is necessary to ensure a minimum level of gene  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    305 flow between local populations to prevent regional speciation. . The first avail- able studies employing molecular methods to investigate geographic separation  among populations of myxomycetes at transcontinental scales revealed differ- ent patterns. . For Didymium difforme [mtDNA (Winsett and Stephenson, 2011)]  and D. . squamulosum [ITS (Winsett and Stephenson, 2008)] no or only weak  evidence for geographic separation was found. . Marker resolution may be a  question. . A study investigating T. 
varia throughout Eurasia with three different  markers [SSU, EF1A, COI (Feng and Schnittler, 2015)] found cryptic specia- tion but with no apparent geographic limitation for these species. . However, the  investigated region was limited to Eurasia. . In contrast. 
 studies of Badhamia  melanospora [SSU (Aguilar et al.. .  2014)] and Hemitrichia serpula [SSU. 
 EF1A  (Dagamac et al.. .  2017c)]   based on specimens collected in different parts of the  world. .  revealed clear evidence for geographical limitation of certain genotypes. .  In such cases, low gene flow and/or mutations in mating-type genes govern- ing amoeboflagellate compatibility may facilitate the evolution of regionally  endemic species. 
To settle this discussion. .  more population genetic studies of clear cut and  widely occurring species of myxomycetes will be needed. .  which could deter- mine the intensity of gene flow between local populations. . This gene flow may  be just strong enough to occupy all possible habitats within geological areas. 
 al- lowing a morphospecies to appear cosmopolitan. .  but not strong enough to break  the dominance of locally adapted genotypes. .  which may or may not evolve into  cryptic species that become regional endemic. 
Understanding which of the two models can be best applied to myxomyce- tes is crucial to estimate the overall diversity of the group. . If all or most spe- cies are cosmopolitan in distribution, the global diversity of the group should  be comparatively low. . However   if indeed a significant proportion of species  of myxomycetes display restricted distribution patterns and these are not sim- ply caused by the patchiness of suitable habitats. 
 their global diversity may be  higher (Mitchell and Meisterfeld. .  2005)  Whereas the postulated broader distri- bution of amoeboflagellates in comparison to fruiting populations would sup- port the ubiquity model. .  the discovery of cryptic species with a more restricted  population than the respective morphospecies would comply better with the  moderate endemicity model. 
TWO-HUNDRED YEARS OF FRUITING BODY-BASED  DIVERSITY RESEARCH IN MYXOMYCETES The first comprehensive monograph of the group (Rostafinsky, 1875) listed a  significant part of the ca. . 1000 species currently described for the myxomycetes  (Lado, 2005), although the number of species per year described as new to sci- ence seems to steadily increase. 
As such, for many morphospecies a consider- able body of data exists, relating to collections of fruiting bodies from all over  the world. . However   as typical for organisms with hidden life styles. 
 systematic  306     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology surveys for myxomycetes have always been carried out by only a few spe- cialists. 
As indicated by monographic treatments. .  the first studied regions  were Europe (Lister. 
 1894   1911   1925; Rostafinsky. .  1875) and Eastern North  America (Hagelstein. 
 1944; Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969; Massee. 
 1892)   Systematic surveys carried out within the past three decades have added a  considerable number of studies of the Neotropics (Lado et al.. .  2003; Rojas  et al.. .  2010   2012a  b   2013; Schnittler et al.. .  2002)  Rather well studied are the  deserts of western South America (Estrada-Torres et al.. 
 2009; Lado et al.. .  2011     2013   2014   2016   2017; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2010   2013) and Central Asia  (Novozhilov et al.. .  2006   2009; Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  2008; Schnittler and  Novozhilov. .  2000; Schnittler et al.. 
 2013)  Only recently have systematic studies  been carried out in the Paleotropics. .  particularly in the Southeast Asian region  (Alfaro et al.. .  2015; Dagamac et al.. .  2010   2011   2012   2014   2015a  b  c; Ko  Ko et al.. .  2010b   2012   2013; Macabago et al.. .  2010   2012   2016 ; Novozhilov  et al.. 
 2017a; Rea-Maminta et al.. .  2015; Tran et al.. 
 2006   2008)   whereas most  parts of tropical Africa remain to be covered. . In spite of this geographically  unevenly distributed study intensity, the available information makes it possible  to compile worldwide distribution maps for particular species. . At least for the formation of fruiting bodies, temperature seems to be an  important factor. 
A significant proportion of the described species of myxomy- cetes appears to be restricted to either temperate or tropical zones (Stephenson  and Stempen, 1994). . For instance, two species of Ceratiomyxa (C. . morchella  and C. 
sphaerosperma) have been found exclusively in the tropics (Rojas  et al., 2008, Fig. . 9 1)  In contrast, the patchy but worldwide range of Barbeyella  FIGURE 9.1 World distribution map of Ceratiomyxa morchella providing an example of a  largely tropical species with restricted distribution. 
The size of the circles indicates the number  of records per investigation site. . Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    307 minutissima. .  a specialist of temperate coniferous forests (Schnittler et al.. .  2000)    corresponds mostly to the temperate zone of the planet. 
 with some occurrenc- es in high mountains of tropical zones (Fig. . 9 2)  These observations support  the ubiquity model, because all regions with suitable microhabitats seem to be  covered. . On a regional scale, such patterns are now well documented. . For example,  Rojas et al. 
(2012b) compared the myxomycete communities associated with  highland areas along a transect that extended from North America to Central  America. . They showed that the similarity of species composition in these high- land areas decreased with decreasing latitude (from Mexico to Costa Rica). .  Moreover, the similarity of species composition in these highland areas, when  compared with the data available from the temperate zones (in this case the  United States) decreased as well. 
A severe problem for biogeographical studies is the apparent rarity of the  fruiting bodies of many species of myxomycetes. . Even surveys represented  by a large number of specimens show a high proportion of singletons [e.g.,  Novozhilov et al. . (2017a): Southern Vietnam, 1136 records, 107 taxa, 23% rep- resented by singletons and Novozhilov et al. . (2017b): Russian Far East, 3280  records, 161 taxa, 21% as singletons]. 
Schnittler and Mitchell (2000) estimated  that more than half of the 446 species of myxomycetes for which data were  available were represented by fewer than three collections thus far. .  which makes  up for a significant proportion of the species known for the group. .  especially of  the newly described species. . Biogeographical studies carried in the Americas  found that species abundances could be predicted on the basis of forest structure  FIGURE 9.2 Needle plot showing the world distribution of Barbeyella minutissima from  fructification records (updated from Schnittler et al.. .  2000)  Each needle arises from the collect- ing site, its length indicates elevation, and the number of ticks the number of records for this side  (see scale at the lower left of the figure). 
308     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology (Rojas et al.. .  2011) but this pattern may as well have been caused by historical- geographical events (Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2013)  Another problem relates to the different methods used. . For example. .  many  species with minute fruiting bodies can be detected only by placing samples  of substrates in moist chamber cultures (Gilbert and Martin. 
 1933)   which  have been used only in a fraction of all surveys. .  due to the intense amount of  labor required. 
Whereas in forested areas most species can be observed directly  in the field (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017b)   in deserts without a high proportion  of succulent plants. .  nearly 100% of the species present can be detected only  with the moist chamber culture technique (Schnittler et al.. .  2015b)  Most of- ten, both approaches complement each other and are equally needed (Dagamac  et al., 2015a,c; Novozhilov et al., 2017a,b; Schnittler and Stephenson, 2000). 
Best studied are the myxomycetes of the north temperate zones, and these  seem to be among the regions with the highest morphospecies diversity. . For  Germany, with a long history of myxomycete research, 373 species have been  recorded (Schnittler et al., 2011). 
Japan and eastern North America, with their  predominately broadleaf forests, seem to have an even higher species diversity,  although precise numbers are difficult to obtain (Yamamoto, 1998). . Temper- ate zones also have the highest diversity of corticolous and follicolous species. .   which can be detected best with the moist chamber culture technique (Gilbert  and Martin. 
 1933; Goad and Stephenson. .  2013; Härkönen. .  1981)  Members  of this group, comprising ca. 
120 species (Mitchell, 2004) with mostly very  small fruiting bodies, inhabit the bark surface of living trees and show two life  strategies (Schnittler, 2001). . These are (1) stalked species with a short develop- ment time and minute, usually stalked fruiting bodies with evanescent peridia  (Echinostelium spp. . and Macbrideola spp.), and (2) sessile species with a longer  development time and robust fruiting bodies, usually covered by a thicker pe- ridium. 
A special   yet species-poor ecological group found within the temperate  zone are bryophilous myxomycetes (Schnittler et al.. .  2010)   which are adapted  to moss layers in permanently humid gorges covering porous rocks or decaying  logs. 
In comparison. .  our current knowledge relating to the diversity of tropi- cal myxomycetes seems to defy the traditional concept (as latitude increases. .   species richness decreases) that applies to many groups of macroorganisms. .  Systematic studies in tropical regions point toward a lower species richness than  for temperate regions, especially for southern temperate zones. . For example,  the comparatively well studied country of Costa Rica has 225 myxomycete spe- cies recorded (Rojas et al., 2010, 2015; Schnittler et al., 2002). 
Although many  tropical regions are still not systematically studied. .  the few systematic sur- veys carried out in tropical forests point seem to support this same trend [e.g.. 
  Ecuador: Yasuni. .  86 species (Lado et al.. 
 2017); southern Vietnam. .  Cat Tien    107 species (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a); and the Philippine archipelago. .  158  species (Dagamac and dela Cruz. .  2015; Macabago et al.. 
 2017)]  Among the  countries in the Neotropical zone were myxomycete are relatively well studied  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    309 [a comprehensive checklist for this region lists a total of 431 taxa. .  (Lado and  Wrigley de Basanta. .  2008)] Mexico. 
 which has a high proportion of arid regions  along high volcanoes with coniferous forests. .  contributes the largest number of  species (323). 
Even with this still fragmentary knowledge. .  we can conclude that  at least the steep increase in species numbers toward tropical regions. .  very well  known for vascular plants or insects. .  is not a pattern shared by myxomycetes. 
The most likely reason for this discrepancy is the moisture regime. . Two  studies along a gradient of increasing elevation and moisture revealed that in  the tropical regions being considered [volcano Cacao. 
 Costa Rica (Schnittler  and Stephenson. .  2002) and slopes of the western Andes. .  Maquipucuna. .  Ecuador  (Schnittler et al.. 
 2002)] showed that species richness and also the proportion of  moist chamber cultures positive for myxomycetes decreased with elevation. . The  lowest figures were always found for the tropical mountains, which are charac- terized by continuously wet forests at the highest elevations. . This is matched by  the observation that in contrast to forests of the temperate zones. .  aerial litter is  more diverse than litter from the forest floor (Alfaro et al.. 
 2015; Stephenson  et al.. .  2008)  In addition. 
 there are unique aerial microhabitats in the tropics. .   such as inflorescences of large monocotyledonous forbs with high substrate pH  [especially Zingiberales (Schnittler and Stephenson. 
 2002)   dead lianas (Coelho  and Stephenson. .  2012; Ko Ko et al.. .  2010a; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2008)    or epiphytic liverworts (Schnittler. .  2000)]  A few species, such as Physarum  didermoides, Ph. . superbum or Ph. 
compressum occur very regularly in aerial  microhabitats. . Further investigations are needed to elucidate the reasons for the  apparent lower myxomycete diversity in the wet tropics. . It is possible that spe- cies may be fruit less abundantly because desiccation as a trigger of fruiting  body formation is absent or fruiting bodies may decompose very rapidly and  thus appear to be less abundant when this is not actually the case. 
DIVERSITY AND SPECIES COMPOSITION OF MYXOMYCETE  COMMUNITIES FROM MAJOR ECOSYSTEMS OF THE WORLD Tundra. .  Forest-Tundra and Subantarctic Habitats As to be expected from the scarce and less diverse cover of vegetation. .  zon- al arctic. .  subarctic and subantarctic ecosystems are rather species-poor for  myxomycetes. 
Stephenson et al. . (2000), analyzing data from ca. . 2000 speci- mens collected from the tundra and forest-tundra of Alaska (Stephenson and  Laursen. 
 1998)   Iceland (Götzsche. .  1990)   Greenland (Götzsche. 
 1989)    and Russian Arctic regions (Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  1997; Novozhilov  et al.. 
 1999)   recorded a total of 150 species. .  but only 33 of these were wide- ly distributed enough to be regarded as species that are regularly associated  with high-latitude regions. 
Lesser known are the myxomycetes of subarctic  regions (Arambarri, 1973; Arambarri and Spinedi, 1989; Wrigley de Basanta   et al., 2010). . Two main factors are likely to limit myxomycete distribution  310     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology toward the extreme high latitudes of both hemispheres. 
These are substrate  availability and climate. . Some lineages may be better suited than others. . For  example, Wrigley de Basanta et al. . (2010) found that members of the order  Trichiales dominated in a survey from Patagonia, whereas members of the order  Physarales are more common in temperate and tropical South America. . Due to the inherent resistance of the three dormant stages (microcysts. 
 sclero- tia. .  and spores) in the life cycle of a myxomycete. 
 low winter temperatures would  seem to be a relatively unimportant factor. . Indeed   the Taimyr Peninsula. .  with the  most extreme winter temperatures of all the high-latitude areas intensively studied. 
  was not only rich in species but also supported Cribraria violacea. .  whose dis- tribution is apparently centered on submeridional to tropical regions. 
A possible  explanation may be the rather high mean summer temperature connected with the  highly continental climate. .  since for approximately one month temperatures are  high enough to allow myxomycetes to complete their life cycle. 
Interestingly, even  species developing large, compact fruiting bodies occur this far north. . Examples  are Lycogala epidendrum, Mucilago crustacea, and Enteridium splendens var. .  juranum  Two of these three species are wood inhabitants, whose distribution is  limited by the presence of larger logs. . In contrast, M. 
crustacea is frequently ob- served in pure tundra regions, emerging from thin mats of raw humus and litter,  sometimes covered with bryophytes and lichens (Stephenson and Laursen, 1993). .  Seemingly, the latter species is not limited by the availability of a certain substrate  and may accept a wide range of food organisms. . Most obligate corticolous mem- bers of the Physarales and Echinosteliales are adapted to near-neutral substrates;  therefore. 
 they are relatively rare in coniferous communities of forest tundra. .  where  tree bark is more acidic [pH 4.5–3.0 (Novozhilov et al.. .  1999)]  A few acidophilic  species [Echinostelium brooksii and Paradiacheopsis fimbriata. 
 Taimyr Penin- sula (Novozhilov et al.. .  1999) and Paradiacheopsis solitaria. .  Alaska (Schnittler  et al.. 
 2016)] conform to this pattern and appear to be consistent inhabitants of  boreal coniferous forests. . As a litter-inhabiting species. 
 Leocarpus fragilis spreads  beyond the timberline into arctic tundra. .  where this species frequently occurs on  the bark of shrubs that provides a higher pH (Schnittler et al.. .  2016)  Still understudied are the communities of nivicolous myxomycetes associ- ated with subarctic and arctic mountains. . Most of the data has originated from  the Scandinavian Mountains (Schinner, 1983) and the Khibine Mountains [Kola  peninsula (Erastova et al., 2017; Novozhilov and Schnittler, 1997)]. 
Only three  of 32 species (Diderma alpinum. .  Diderma niveum. 
 and Physarum albescens)  were found to be widely distributed in the Khibine Mountains. .  where species  richness and diversity decreases from subalpine crooked-stem birch-mountain  ash forests to alpine mountain tundra (Erastova et al.. .  2017)  Boreal Forests (Taiga) and Subalpine/Montane Coniferous Forests Taiga (coniferous boreal forests. .  including montane coniferous forests) repre- sents the world’s largest biome. .  and myxomycetes associated with this type of  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    311 ecosystem are rather well studied [Alaska (Schnittler et al.. 
 2016; Stephenson. .   2004; Stephenson and Laursen. 
 1998); Scandinavia (Eliasson and Strid. .  1976;  Härkönen. .  1977; Schinner. 
 1983); Russia (Kosheleva et al.. .  2008; Novozhilov  and Fefelov. .  2000; Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996; Stephenson. 
 2004; Vlasen- ko and Novozhilov. .  2011); German Alps (Schnittler and Novozhilov. 
 1998);  Japan (Takahashi and Hada. .  2012; Takahashi and Harakon. 
 2012)]  The most  common taxa in these biomes are members of the Cribrariaceae, Trichiaceae and  Stemonitidaceae on decaying conifer wood with an acidic pH. . Typical species  include S. . axifera, Licea minima, Comatricha elegans, C. . nigra, and Cribrar- ia spp. 
In addition, a second species assemblage (Lepidoderma tigrinum and  Lamproderma columbinum but especially Colloderma oculatum and B. . minutis- sima) can be called bryophilous. .  since they are associated with layers of bryo- phytes on decorticated coniferous logs (Schnittler and Novozhilov. .  1996   1998)  and rocks (Schnittler et al.. .  2010)  Food organisms may include unicellular al- gae, which form gelatinous layers on these substrates. 
This association would  explain the late peak of fruiting—cool nights in late autumn characterized by  an extended dewfall. .  thus keeping the bryophyte layer continuously wet for  some weeks and thereby allowing algal growth. 
Moist, Sphagnum-rich spruce  woodlands are typical for taiga forests and have a species-poor assemblage of  specialized species, such as Didymium melanospermum, Physarum virescens,  Ph. . confertum, and Fuligo muscorum, which typically fruit in the shelter of  moss tussocks. 
Not a lot is known about Sphagnum bogs. .  but at least three  species (Badhamia lilacina. .  Diderma simplex. 
 and Symphytocarpus trechis- porus) seem to be specialized for this microhabitat and occur even in raised  bogs. . Nivicolous myxomycetes are found in low-elevation mountains (Ronikier  and Ronikier, 2009; Ronikier et al., 2008). . Commonly encountered species are  Diderma niveum, Lepidoderma chailletii and L. . ovoideum, whereas in lowland  coniferous forests Meriderma carestiae and D. . niveum may occur (Erastova and  Novozhilov, 2015). . Temperate Forests Temperate deciduous forests support the most diverse and abundant myxomy- cete communities in the world (Ing. 
 1994; Novozhilov et al.. .  2017b; Stephenson  et al.. .  2001; Takahashi. 
 2004)  Especially rich appear to be broadleaf decidu- ous forests, occurring in climates with a summer peak in rainfall. . Examples  include eastern North America [Great Smoky Mts. . National Park (Stephenson  et al., 2001)] or the Manchurian-Japanese mixed broadleaf forests of northeast  Asia [Sikhote-Alin Biosphere Reserve (Novozhilov et al., 2017b)]. . A number of  microhabitats with specialized myxomycete assemblages have been described  during the past decade. .  including bark and decaying twigs in the forest canopy  (Schnittler et al.. 
 2006; Snell et al.. .  2003) or ravine myxomycetes (Ing. .  1994)    which exhibit a preference for bryophyte covers on rocks (see earlier). . The lat- ter are known from the British Islands (Ing, 1983) and Germany (Schnittler  312     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology et al., 2010). 
Both species diversity and abundance in temperate forests tend to  achieve their maximum near the wetter end of the moisture gradient (Rollins  and Stephenson, 2011). . Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands, Scrub Mediterranean forests and scrublands are characterized by hot and dry sum- mers, while winters tend to be cool and moist. . These two types of vegetation oc- cur between 30 and 40 degree northern and southern latitudes on the westward  sides of continents and include five regions. . These are the Mediterranean. 
 south  central and southwestern Australia. .  the fynbos of southern Africa. .  the Chilean  matorral. .  and the Mediterranean ecoregions of California with scrubland vegeta- tion (chaparral). . Well studied are the species-rich communities of myxomycetes  around the Mediterranean Sea (Binyamini. 
 1997; Härkönen. .  1988; Lado. 
 1994)  and the Californian scrubland (Critchfield and Demaree. .  1991; Estrada-Torres  et al.. 
 2009)  Less complete information is available about southern Africa  (Ndiritu et al., 2009c), the Chilean matorral (Lado et al., 2013), and scrub com- munities of Australia (Mitchell, 1995). . High moisture gradients at small scales  together with the regular fluctuations in moisture are the most likely reason  for the high diversity, especially for corticolous species. . Many new taxa have  been described in the past few decades (Pando, 1997), and these show some  similarities with communities from desert areas (Schnittler and Novozhilov,  2000). 
Preferred substrates for myxomycetes are Olea europaea, Juniperus  spp. . (Schnittler et al., 2015a), and Quercus spp., which support various minute  species [Echinostelium, Licea, and Macbrideola spp. . (Pando and Lado, 1990;  Wrigley de Basanta, 1998)]. 
In addition, a large supply of slowly decaying leaf  litter from sclerophyllous shrubs supports many litter-inhabiting species, such  as Diderma asteroides and Physarum brunneolum. . Tropical and Subtropical Forests Stephenson et al. 
(2004) summarized the body of information available on  Neotropical myxomycetes and suggested that three major trends seem to ex- ist. . First, myxomycete species richness and abundance appear to be lower in  tropical forests when compared to temperate forests. . Second, both abundance  and richness of myxomycetes decrease with increasing moisture (Schnittler and  Stephenson, 2000). . Third, some microhabitats with no equivalents in temper- ate regions support distinct assemblages of myxomycetes. . Some species (e.g.,  A. . bombarda and C. 
sphaerosperma), which require high temperature for de- velopment, seem to be restricted largely if not exclusively to tropical climates. . Somewhat lagging behind are research efforts directed toward the Pa- leotropics, especially in Africa. . A comprehensive checklist by Ndiritu  et al. 
(2009c), listed a total of only 294 species represented by 49 genera  reported from 31 African countries, most of which are anecdotal in nature. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    313 Some relatively well-studied localities in Africa include Ethiopia (Dagamac  et al.. 
 2017a)   Tanzania (Ukkola et al.. .  1996)   and Kenya (Ndiritu et al.. .  2009a)   The survey with the highest number of species (124) reported was carried out in  Madagascar. .  once again a region with a significant proportion of highlands  and arid regions. 
 with one species (Perichaena madagascariensis) reported as  new to science (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2013)  Better studied areas are  the Southeast Asian Paleotropics. .  with surveys carried out in Singapore [92  species (Rosing et al.. .  2011)]   Myanmar [67 species (Ko Ko et al.. .  2013)]    Vietnam [107 species (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)]   Laos [44 species (Ko Ko  et al.. .  2012)]   the Philippines [158 species (Dagamac and dela Cruz. 
 2015;  Macabago et al.. .  2017)]   and Thailand [132 species (Ko Ko et al.. 
 2010b;  Tran et al.. .  2008)]  Factors   such as seasonality (Dagamac et al.. 
 2012; Ko Ko  et al.. .  2011)   disturbance (Dagamac et al.. .  2015a; Rea-Maminta et al.. 
 2015)    and litter heterogeneity (Alfaro et al.. .  2015; Tran et al.. .  2006) have been inves- tigated to explain the occurrence and distribution of myxomycetes in the re- gion. 
In the past decade. .  a number of new species have been described from the  region. .  including Comatrichia spinispora (Novozhilov and Mitchell. .  2014)    Craterium retisporum (Moreno et al.. .  2009)   Cribraria tecta (Hooff. .  2009)    and Perichaena echinolophospora (Novozhilov and Stephenson. .  2015)  For tropical regions. 
 the moist chamber culture technique seems to provide  both lower species diversity and fewer fruiting bodies per species found. .  fol- lowing a gradient of habitat aridity from deserts (where moist chamber cultures  work best) to temperate zones to tropical zones. 
As a consequence. .  the litter  microhabitat. .  when examined by moist chamber cultures. .  yields a considerably  lower species richness than what would be expected for the same microhabitat  in temperate regions (Stephenson et al.. 
 1999)  In addition. .  a clear pattern of decreasing species richness with increasing  elevation and moisture has been noted in several studies [field collections from  Puerto Rico (Novozhilov et al.. .  2000)   a moisture gradient along a volcano in  Costa Rica (Schnittler and Stephenson. .  2000) and the western slopes of the  Andes (Schnittler et al.. 
 2002)]  Most likely, continuous moisture does not trig- ger the formation of fruiting bodies, and strong rainfall events seem to wash  away amoeboflagellates and/or plasmodia. . Evidence for the latter hypothesis  comes from the observation that the proportion of species with phaneroplasmo- dia (the most robust of the types of plasmodia produced by myxomycetes) in- creases with increasing elevation and moisture. . In addition, species richness of  bark-inhabiting myxomycetes has been found to be negatively correlated with  the amount of epiphyte coverage and moisture. . Further support comes from  aerial microhabitats, which in the tropics support a higher diversity and abun- dance of myxomycetes when compared to ground microhabitats. . Presumably,  since these microhabitats are not in contact with the forest floor, they have a  better chance of drying out after rainfall events in the wet tropics. . High elevation tropical forests have remained mostly unstudied. . Stud- ies of high-elevation Quercus forests in Costa Rica revealed a myxomycete  314     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology community strongly differing from those communities characteristic of lowland  tropical forests but displaying similarities (both taxonomically and ecologically)  to assemblages associated with temperate forests (Rojas and Stephenson. 
 2007;  Rojas et al.. .  2010)  The authors reported several species, most notably L. . fra- gilis, that tend to be largely absent from tropical regions but are characteristic  of temperate regions. 
A similar trend has been reported for mountain forests of  southern Vietnam. .  which have a vegetation dominated by families with many  temperate tree genera from the Fagaceae. .  Magnoliaceae and Pinaceae). 
 where  B  minutissima and L. . columbinum were present (Novozhilov, pers. 
comm )  Asian Paleotropical forests seem to be richer in species of myxomycete than  Neotropical forests (Dagamac et al.. .  2017b) and some species seem to be more  common in the Asian Paleotropics. .  like Physarum echinosporum (Fig. 
9 3)  The  presence of conifers (Pinus spp.) with acidic bark and wood in the mountains  of Vietnam and Thailand may contribute to this pattern. . Several species (e.g., B. 
 minutissima, E. . brooksii, E. 
colliculosum, L. . columbinum. 
 Licea kleistobolus. .   Lindbladia tubulina. .  Paradiacheopsis rigida. .  and Trichia persimilis) that are  known to be common in the temperate zones have been reported from these  mountain forests. . As noted earlier in this chapter. 
 it has been suggested that moist tropical  forests may receive too much rain to be conducive to the successful completion  of the myxomycete life cycle. .  which appears to be best suited to alternating  wet and dry periods. 
This hypothesis seems to be supported by reports that  aerial microhabitats. .  in the tropics. .  support a greater diversity and abundance  of myxomycetes when compared to ground microhabitats (as already noted  FIGURE 9.3 World distribution map for Physarum echinosporum providing examples of  largely tropical species with restricted distribution. 
The size of the circles indicates the number  of records per investigation site. . Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    315 but also see Chapter 8). . Specific microhabitats for tropical myxomycetes in- clude inflorescences of monocotyledonous herbs with an extremely high pH  (Schnittler et al.. 
 2002)   living leaves in the forest understory that have been  overgrown with liverworts (Schnittler. .  2000)   and both living and decaying lia- nas (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2008)   once again a substrate characterized by  rather high pH values. 
Steppes and Prairies At a first glance. .  due to a lack of woody debris. .  grasslands would not seem to  provide good habitats for myxomycetes. .  despite evidence from studies show- ing that amoeboflagellates are more common in grassland soils than in forest  soils (Feest and Madelin. .  1988)  However   studies carried out in the steppe re- gions of Russia (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2006   2010)   Mongolia (Novozhilov and  Schnittler. .  2008)   and the Midwestern United States (Rollins and Stephenson. 
  2013) reported a surprisingly high diversity of myxomycetes. . Recently, Fiore- Donno et al. 
(2016) analyzed soil samples from a temperate grassland in  Germany by ePCR and found that the most abundant OTUs belonged to the  genera Lamproderma and Didymium. . A special assemblage of species in grass- lands often abundantly grazed by herbivores, such as horses and cattle includes  coprophilous species (Eliasson and Lundqvist, 1979). 
Typical examples in- clude Kelleromyxa fimicola and Perichaena liceoides associated with dung and  D. . squamulosum, Echinostelium minutum, Fuligo cinerea, and Ph. . pseudonota- bile (Novozhilov et al., 2013a), which are associated with grass litter. 
At the grassland-forest transition zone, species diversity tends to increase  toward the latter. . Looking at the species/genus ratio, Rollins and Stephenson  (2013) found a trend of increasing taxonomic diversity moving eastward from  short to tallgrass prairie. 
In the Russian Altay (Novozhilov et al.. .  2010)   a pro- nounced trend of increasing species richness was found when moving from dry  steppe (6 species. 
 H′ = 1.6) over dark coniferous taiga and secondary mixed  aspen and birch forests (99 species. .  H′ = 4.1) to mixed forests (116 species. .   H′ = 4.2); diversity decreased again toward the forest-steppe zone (65 species. .   H′ = 3.7). 
Overall species dominance in the treeless dry steppe was found to  be higher (D = 0.26) when compared to the forest steppe. .  where lignicolous  myxomycetes occur in forest islands near rivulets (D = 0.05). 
As would be ex- pected. .  the occurrence of woody debris causes pronounced differences between  the assemblagesof myxomycetes associated with open grasslands and adjacent  gallery forest (Rollins and Stephenson. .  2013)  Subalpine and Alpine Grasslands Subalpine meadows and alpine grasslands occur above the timberline in the  high mountains, mostly in regions with a temperate climate. . Climatic conditions  (low temperatures and heavy snow accumulation) limit the period of vegetative  316     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology growth to a few months but such areas still support rich communities of tall forbs. .   such as can be observed in the northwestern Caucasus (Onipchenko. .  2004) or the  Southern Alps of New Zealand (Stephenson. 
 pers  observ )  This type of vegeta- tion supports a rich assemblage of snowbank (nivicolous) myxomycetes, with  about 100 species having been described since the pioneering studies of Meylan  (Kowalski, 1975). . Nivicolous myxomycetes are best studied in the northern  hemisphere (Lado. 
 2004; Lado and Ronikier. .  2008   2009; Meylan. 
 1914;  Moreno et al.. .  2005; Ronikier and Ronikier. .  2009; Singer et al.. .  2005; Stephen- son and Shadwick. 
 2009)  The soil-inhabiting nivicolous myxomycetes are not  strictly alpine (Ronikier and Ronikier. .  2009) but occur as well in boreal low- land forests and in low-elevation mountains (Erastova and Novozhilov. 
 2015;  Müller. .  2002; Ronikier et al.. .  2008; Tamayama. .  2000; Yajima et al.. .  2006)  As  already suggested in an initial paper by Schinner et al. 
(1990), the prevailing  conditions determine the occurrence of myxomycetes. . Since amoeboflagellates  are susceptible to frost. .  early snowfalls and a long. .  contiguous snow cover. .  pro- viding stable temperatures around zero degrees under the snow. 
 are crucial for  the formation of fruiting bodies (Schnittler et al.. .  2015a; Shchepin et al.. 
 2014)   These studies have suggested that nivicolous myxomycetes are important pred- ators in the microbial communities that exist beneath the snow. . Deserts and Other Arid Areas Since myxomycetes need water or substrates covered by a film of water for their  active life, one might not expect these organisms to occur in deserts. . However,  numerous studies from arid ecosystems, often employing the moist chamber  culture technique, have revealed astounding myxomycete diversity in arid re- gions. 
A series of surveys throughout Middle and Central Asia. .  extending from  the Caspian Lowlands (Novozhilov et al.. .  2006)   western Kazakhstan (Schnittler  and Novozhilov. .  2000)   across the inner mountain basins of the Russian Altay  (Novozhilov et al.. 
 2010) to Mongolia (Novozhilov and Schnittler. .  2008) to  the Chinese province of Xinjiang (Schnittler et al.. 
 2013) have explored the  diversity of myxomycetes in winter-cold steppes and deserts. . More limited data  exist for Australian deserts (Davison et al., 2008; S.L. 
Stephenson, unpub. . data)  and the southwestern United States (Blackwell and Gilbertson,1980, 1984;  Evenson, 1961; Ndiritu et al., 2009b; Novozhilov et al., 2003). . A rich body  of data also exists for the deserts of Central and South America [arid regions  of Mexico (Estrada-Torres et al., 2009) and Chile (Lado et al., 2007)]. . Pub- lished species lists from other deserts throughout the world include the Sinai  Peninsula (Ramon. 
 1968)   Morocco (Yamni and Meyer. .  2008)   Oman (Schnittler  et al.. .  2015b)   and a few reports from the Sahara (Faurel et al.. 
 1965)  Although the lack of moisture in desert environments undoubtedly places se- vere constraints on the growth and development of myxomycetes. .  two strategies  have evolved that allow myxomycetes to utilize the few suitable microhabitats. 
 First   minute   usually stalked. .  species develop rapidly from protoplasmodia  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    317 or very small aphanoplasmodia and thus can benefit from occasional rainfall  events. . Second, species forming sessile fruiting bodies with a hard-shelled  peridium seem to be able to withstand repeated phases of drought during de- velopment (Schnittler, 2001). . Eventually, the peridium dehisces to release the  spores when the substrate on which the fruiting bodies occur dries out com- pletely. . In addition, special microhaibtats, most prominently succulent plants,  support a distinctive assemblage of myxomycete assemblages. . One prominent  example is B. 
melanospora (Aguilar et al., 2014). . In response to moisture fluc- tuations, these species may repeatedly switch between actively feeding plas- modia and dormant sclerotia (Estrada-Torres et al., 2009). . The three dormant  stages (spores, microcysts, and sclerotia) are the key for myxomycete survival  in deserts. . Blackwell and Gilbertson (1984) reported that myxomycete sclerotia  incubated at 70°C still had significant survival rates, although survival differed  between the species examined. . Many substrates for desert myxomycetes are characterized by a much higher  pH in comparison to most substrates from other environments (Schnittler, 2001). 
 These observations may explain the high number of apparent specialists. .  limited  to particular microhabitats or even specific life forms of vascular plants [such  as the succulenticolous myxomycetes (Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2009)]  A remark- ably high number of species have been described from material collected in  deserts. 
 and many of these are not yet known from any other type of ecosys- tem (Blackwell and Gilbertson. .  1980; Lado et al.. .  2007; Mosquera et al.. .  2000;  Novozhilov et al.. .  2008   2013a; Novozhilov and Zemlyanskaya. .  2006; Wrigley  de Basanta et al.. 
 2009   2010)  Coastal Habitats and Mangroves Only a few studies directed toward the myxomycete communities associated  with coastal habitats and mangroves have been carried out. .  although coastal  ecosystems encompass a broad range of habitat types. 
 such as dune grass veg- etation (Howard. .  1948)   mangrove swamps (Cavalcanti et al.. .  2014   2016;  Kohlmeyer. 
 1969)   shingle beaches (Ing. .  1967)   or marshes and coastal forests  (Eliasson. .  1971)  The most important environmental factors shaping myxomycete  diversity and distribution in coastal habitats may be strong wind. 
 sea level oscil- lations (high salinity). .  temporarily high temperatures for coastlines in the tropics  and subtropics. .  anaerobic soils and the absence of forest vegetation. 
Ing (1994). .   reviewing myxomycete diversity in sea shore communities. .  stated that there are no  exclusively marine myxomycetes known. 
 although species common in adjacent  woodland communities have been found on dune grasses and herbaceous litter. .    as well as on driftwood accumulated on the sea shore (Hagelstein. .  1930)  Ing  (1968) noted that in areas where woodland is scarce, driftwood may be a valu- able reservoir for common lignicolous species. . In addition, some rare species  may be common in these habitats. . For example, on Cladonia spp. . in dry slacks. 
  the very rare Listerella paradoxa has been found in Scotland; elsewhere. .  it is  318     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology known only from lichen heath on shingle or moorland. . Diacheopsis mitchellii  was described on the basis of material collected on Cladonia in dune systems  in southeast England (Ing, 1994). 
Adamonytė et al. . (2013) studied a Great Cor- morant (Phalacrocorax carbo) colony in Lithuania. .  obtaining in moist chamber  cultures of various kinds of substrates such rare species as Arcyria leiocarpa. .   Badhamia apiculospora. .  and Comatricha mirabilis. . Reports of myxomycetes  from mangrove belts come from Brazil (Cavalcanti et al., 2014, 2016; Dama- sceno et al., 2011). 
Overall diversity is low, and regular inundation by the sea  appears to inhibit fruiting body development. . Currently, 31 species have been  recorded from mangrove forests (Cavalcanti et al., 2016); the most common are  A. 
cinerea, A. . denudata, Collaria arcyrionema and Stemonitis fusca. 
Agricultural and Urban Habitats Ing (1994) noted that temperate grasslands are rather poor in myxomycetes, al- though Badhamia foliicola, M. . crustacea, and (especially) Physarum cinereum  often occur in residential lawns. . Saunders and Saunders (1900), who examined  piles of rotting straw near cornfields, reported that different species of myxo- mycetes tended to be associated with different parts of the pile. 
Fuligo cinerea,  Physarum didermoides, and Ph. . pusillum were found in association with the  dry outer parts of the pile, whereas Didymium difforme and D. . vaccinum were  consistently associated with the bottom of the pile, where water retention was  greatest. 
Myxomycetes are not pathogenic to plants, although they occasionally  cause indirect injury. . This occurs when they cover and shade plant tissues and  inhibit photosynthesis. . Recently, Comatricha pulchella and Fuligo septica were recorded on cul- tivated Dendrobium candidum and apparently affected the growth of this plant  (Tu et al., 2016). . Well known is the occurrence of F. 
septica on the wood chips  used as organic mulch in gardening. . Myxomycetes are common in parks and  gardens, where they can use natural as well as artificial substrates. . Ing (1994)  mentioned the studies of Brãndză (1924), where the author constructed “nurser- ies” (e.g., piles of branches, sawdust, leaves, manure, and waste paper) to attract  myxomycetes. 
In this way, he recorded 33 species, including nine new to Roma- nia. . Corticolous species are not rare in parks of cities but may suffer from acid  pollution (Härkönen and Vänskä, 2004; Wrigley de Basanta, 2000). . Interestingly. 
 the low diversity of fruiting bodies as based on field observa- tions does not agree well with the abundance of amoeboflagellates and plas- modia in the soil. .  as shown by culturing (Feest. .  1987) and ePCR (Fiore-Donno  et al.. 
 2016)  Much more work is needed to correlate the occurrence of myxo- mycete fruiting bodies with the real diversity of these organisms in artificial  habitats. . Without doubt, artificial habitats can attract specialists that are rare or  absent in natural vegetation. . For instance. 
 the acidotolerant corticolous Cribrar- ia confusa is very common in artificial plantations and gardens in southern Viet- nam on the acidic bark of Pinus kesiya and Anacardium occidentale but rare in  natural forests (Novozhilov et al.. .  2017a)  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    319 Heathlands With its low and dense shrub cover warming up quickly. .  Ing (1994) indicated  that some species of myxomycete may be associated with the litter and decay- ing twiglets of shrubs. 
 such as Calluna vulgaris. . Candidate species may include  Listerella paradoxa on lichens and Diderma simplex and Fuligo muscorum on  litter and old stems of Calluna and Erica (Santesson, 1948). 
Savannahs and Semi-Arid Grasslands The few studies carried out in semi-arid habitats include those of the cerrado in  Brazil (Maimoni-Rodella and Gottsberger. .  1980) and the African savannas and  tropical dry forests (Dagamac et al.. 
 2017a; Härkönen. .  1981)  Most common  are litter-inhabiting species. . A number of rarely recorded species were record- ed from dry forests in Ethiopia (Dagamac et al.. 
 2017a)   including Didymium  saturnus. .  Metatrichia floripara. .  Perichaena areolata. .  and Physarina echinos- pora. 
Moreover, there is some evidence that similar to its unique flora, the east  African mountain ranges harbor a diverse and distinctive assemblage of myxo- mycetes. . Of particular interest as substrates for myxomycetes are the hollow  decaying trunks of giant tree-like lobelias. . Samples collected from similar and  placed in moist chamber cultures, Rammeloo (1975a,b) described several new  species of myxomycete in the 1960s. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Y. . Novozhilov acknowledges support from several grants from RFBR (Russian Foundation of  Basic Research, 15-29-02622) for field work summarized in this chapter. . REFERENCES Adamonytė, G., Iršėnaitė, R., Motieju¯naitė, J., Matulevicˇiu¯tė, D., Taraškevicˇius, R., 2013. 
 Myxomycetes in a forest affected by great cormorant colony: a case study in Western Lithuania. .  Fungal Divers. 
59, 131–146. .  Adamonytė, G., Stephenson, S.L., Michaud, A., Seraoui, E.H., Meyer, M., Novozhilov, Y.K.,  Krivomaz, T., 2011. . Myxomycete species diversity on the island of La Réunion (Indian Ocean). 
 Nova Hedwigia 92, 523–549. .  Adl, S.M., Habura, A., Eglit, Y., 2014. 
Amplification primers of SSU rDNA for soil protists. . Soil  Biol. 
Biochem  69, 328–342. .  Aguilar, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Lado, C., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2014. . Using environmental  niche models to test the ‘everything is everywhere’ hypothesis for Badhamia. 
ISME J  8,  737–745. .  Alfaro, J.R.D., Alcayde, D.L.I.M., Agbulos, J.B., Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015. . The  occurrence of myxomycetes from a lowland montane forest and agricultural plantations of  Negros Occidental, Western Visayas, Philippines. 
Fine Focus 1, 7–20. .  Arambarri, A.M., 1973. 
Myxomycetes de Tierra del Fuego I. . Especies nuevas y criticas del genero  Diderma (Didymiaceae). 
Bol  Soc  Argent  Botán  15, 175–182. .  Arambarri, A.M., Spinedi, H.A., 1989. 
Antarctic Myxomycetes [Mixomicetes antárticos]. . Instituto  Antártico Argentino, Buenos Aires. . Contribución 365, pp. 
12  320     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Araujo, J.C., Lado, C., Xavier-Santos, S., 2015. . Perichaena calongei (Trichiales): a new record of  Myxomycetes from Brazil. 
Curr  Res  Environ  Appl  Mycol  5, 352–356. .  Bardele, C.F., Foissner, W., Blanton, R.L., 1991. 
Morphology, morphogenesis and systematic  position of the sorocarp forming ciliate Sorogena stoianovitchae Bradbury & Olive, 1980. .  J  Protozool  38, 7–17   Bass, D., Boenigk, J., 2011. . Everything is everywhere: a twenty-first century de-/reconstruction  with respect to protists. . In: Fontaneto, D. 
(Ed.), Biogeography of Microscopic Organisms: Is  Everything Small Everywhere?. . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. . 88–110   Binyamini, N., 1997. 
Myxomycetes from Israel IV. . Mycoscience 38, 87–89. .  Blackwell, M., Gilbertson, R.L., 1980. 
Didymium eremophilum: a new myxomycete from the So- noran Desert. . Mycologia 72, 791–797. .  Blackwell, M., Gilbertson, R.L., 1984. . Distribution and sporulation phenology of myxomycetes in  the Sonoran desert of Arizona. 
Microb  Ecol  10, 369–377. .  Blackwell, M.R., Laman, T.G., Gilbertson, R., 1982. 
Spore dispersal in Fuligo septica (Myxomyce- tes) by lathridiid beetles. . Mycotaxon 14, 58–60. .  Brãndză, M., 1924. . Sur l’apparition des Myxomycetes dans le Bugey. . Bull  Fed  Centr  Hist  Mykol   3, 13–20   Brown, M.W., Silberman, J.D., Spiegel, F.W., 2012. . A contemporary evaluation of the acrasids  (Acrasidae, Heterolobosea, Excavata). . Eur  J  Protistol  48, 103–123. 
 Buxton, P.A., 1954. . British diptera associated with Fungi. . 2  Diptera bred from myxomycetes. 
Proc   Roy  Entomol  Soc  29, 163–171. .  Cavalcanti, L.H., Damasceno, G., Bezerra, A.C.C., Costa, A.A.A., 2014. 
Mangrove myxomycetes:  species occurring on Conocarpus erectus L. . (Combretaceae). 
Sydowia 66, 183–190. .  Cavalcanti, L.H., Damasceno, G., Costa, A.A.A., Bezerra, A.C.C., 2016. . Myxomycetes in Brazilian  mangroves: species associated with Avicennia nitida, Laguncularia racemosa and Rhizophora  mangle. 
Mar  Biodiv  Rec  9   Chassain, M., 1973. . Capture d’un insecte collembole par deux Myxomycètes. 
Doc  Mycol  8,   37–38. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2013. 
The nuclear reproductive cycle in the myxomycetes: a review. .  Mycosphere 4, 233–248. .  Coelho, I.L., Stephenson, S.L., 2012. 
Myxomycetes associated with pipevine, a temperate liana. .  Mycosphere 3, 245–249. .  Collins, O.N.R., 1979. . Myxomycete biosystematics: some recent developments and future research  opportunities. 
Bot  Rev  45, 145–201. .  Cotterill, F.P.D., Al-Rasheid, K., Foissner, W., 2008. 
Conservation of protists: Is it needed at all?  Biodiv. . Conserv  17, 427–443. .  Critchfield, R.L., Demaree, R.S., 1991. . Annotated checklist of California Myxomycetes. 
Madrõna  38, pp. . 45–56  Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015. 
Myxomycete research in the Philippines: updates and  opportunities. . Mycosphere 6, 784–795. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., Pangilinan, M.V.B., Stephenson, S.L., 2011. . List of species  collected and interactive database of myxomycetes (plasmodial slime molds) for Mt. 
Arayat  National Park, Pampanga, Philippines. . Mycosphere 2, 449–455. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., Rea-Maninta, M.A.D., Aril-dela Cruz, J.V., Schnittler, M.,  2015a. . Rapid assessment of myxomycete diversity in Bicol Peninsula. 
Nova Hedwigia 100,  31–46. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Hoffman, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2017a. 
Myxomycetes from the  highlands of Ethiopia. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 111–127. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    321 Dagamac, N.H.A., Leontyev, D.V., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2010. . Corticolous myxomycetes associated  with Samonea samans (Jacq.) Merr. 
collected from different sites in Luzon Island, Philippines. .  Philippine Biota 43, 2–15. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Novozhilov, Y.K., Stephenson, S.L., Lado, C., Rojas, C., dela Cruz, T.E.E., Un- terseher, M., Schnittler, M., 2017b. 
Biogeographical assessment of myxomycete assemblages  from Neotropical and Asian Paleotropical forests. . J  Biogeogr  44(7), 1524–1536. . Dagamac, N.H.A., Rea-Maminta, M.A.D., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015b. . Plasmodial slime molds of a  tropical karst forest, Quezon National Park, the Philippines. 
Pacific Sci. . 69, 407–418. 
 Dagamac, N.H.A., Rea-Maminta, M.A.D., Batungbacal, N.S., Jung, S.H., Bulang, C.R.T., Cayago,  A.G.R., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015c. . Diversity of plasmodial slime molds (myxomycetes) on  coastal, mountain, and community forests of Puerto Galera, Oriental Mindoro, Philippines. .  J  Asia Pac  Biodiv  8, 322–329. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Rojas, C., Novozhilov, Y.K., Moreno, G.H., Schlueter, R., Schnittler, M., 2017c. .  Speciation in progress? A phylogeographic study among populations of Hemitrichia serpula  (Myxomycetes). 
PLoS One 12 (4), e0174825. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Stephenson, S.L., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2012. 
Occurrence, distribution and diversity  of myxomycetes (plasmodial slime molds) along two transects in Mt. . Arayat National Park,  Pampanga, Philippines. 
Mycology 3, 119–126. .  Dagamac, N.H.A., Stephenson, S.L., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2014. 
The occurrence of litter myxomycetes  at different elevations in Mt. . Arayat, National Park, Pampanga, Philippines. . Nova Hedwigia  98, 187–196. .  Damasceno, G., Tenorio, J.C.G., Cavalcanti, L.H., 2011. . Stemonitaceae (Myxomycetes) in Brazilian  mangroves. 
Sydowia 63, 9–22. .  Davison, E.M., Davison, P.J.N., Brims, M.H., 2008. 
Moist chamber and field collections of myxo- mycetes from the northern Simpson Desert, Australia. . Aust  Mycol  27, 129–135. .  Dixon, P.A., 1963. 
Spore liberation by water drops in some myxomycetes. . Trans  Br  Mycol  Soc   46, 615–619. .  Eliasson, U., 1971. . A collection of myxomycetes from the Galapagos Islands. 
Svensk Botan. . Tids   65, 105–111. .  Eliasson, U., 1991. 
The myxomycete biota of the Hawaiian Islands. . Mycol  Res  95, 257–267. .  Eliasson, U., Lundqvist, N., 1979. 
Fimicolous myxomycetes. . Botan  Notiser 132, 551–568. .  Eliasson, U., Nannenga-Bremekamp, N.E., 1983. . Myxomycetes from the Scalesia forest, Galapa- gos Islands. 
Proc  Konin  Neder  Akad  Weten  86, 148–153. .  Eliasson, U., Strid, Å., 1976. 
Wood-inhabiting fungi of alder forests in north-central Scandinavia. .  3  Myxomycetes. 
Botan  Notiser 129, 267–272. .  Erastova, D.A., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2015. . Nivicolous myxomycetes of the lowland landscapes of the  Northwest of Russia. 
Mikol  Fitopatol  49, 9–18   Erastova, D.A., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2017. . Nivicolous myxomycetes of the Khibiny  Mountains, Kola Peninsula, Russia. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 85–100. .  Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Conde, E., Lado, C., 2009. 
Myxomycetes associated  with dryland ecosystems of the Tehuacán-Cuicatlán Valley Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. . Fungal  Diver. . 36, 17–56   Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., 2013. 
Biogeographic patterns of the myxomy- cete biota of the Americas using a parsimony analysis of endemicity. . Fungal Diver. 
59, 159–177. .  Evenson, A.E., 1961. 
A preliminary report of the Myxomycetes of southern Arizona. . Mycologia  53, 137–144. .  Faurel, L., Feldmann, J., Schotter, G., 1965. 
Catalogue des Myxomycétes de l’Afrique du Nord. .  Bull  Soc  Hist  Nat  l’Afrique Nord 55, 7–39. 
 322     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Feest, A., 1987. . The quantitative ecology of soil Mycetozoa. . Prog  Protist  2, 331–361. .  Feest, A., Madelin, M.F., 1988. 
Seasonal population changes of myxomycetes and associated organ- ism in four woodland soils. . FEMS Microbiol. . Ecol  53, 133–140. .  Feng, Y., Klahr, A., Janik, P., Ronikier, A., Hoppe, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2016. 
What  an intron may tell: several sexual biospecies coexist in Meriderma spp. . (Myxomycetes). . Protist  167, 234–253. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2015. 
Sex or no sex? Independent marker genes and group I introns re- veal the existence of three sexual but reproductively isolated biospecies in Trichia varia  (Myxomycetes). . Organ  Diver  Evol  15, 631–650. .  Feng, Y., Schnittler, M., 2017. 
Molecular or morphological species? Myxomycete diversity in a  deciduous forest in northeastern Germany. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 359–382. .  Finlay, B.J., 2002. 
Global dispersal of free-living microbial eukaryotic species. . Science 296,  1061–1063. .  Finlay, B.J., Clarke, K.J., 1999. 
Ubiquitous dispersal of microbial species. . Nature 400, 828. .  Finlay, B.J., Esteban, G.F., Fenchel, T., 2004. . Protist diversity is different? Protist 155, 15–22. 
 Fiore-Donno, A.M., Berney, C., Pawlowski, J., Baldauf, S.L., 2005. . Higher-order phylogeny of  plasmodial slime molds (Myxogastria) based on elongation factor 1-A and small subunit rRNA  gene sequences. . J  Eukaryot  Microbiol  52, 201–210. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Clissmann, F., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2013. 
Two-gene  phylogeny of bright-spored myxomycetes (slime moulds, superorder Lucisporidia). . PLoS One  8, e62586. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Haskin, E.F., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2009. 
Semimorula liquescens  is a modified echinostelid myxomycete (Mycetozoa). . Mycologia 101, 773–776. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., Fukui, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2012. .  18S rDNA phylogeny of Lamproderma and allied genera (Stemonitales, Myxomycetes, Amoe- bozoa). 
PLoS One 7, e35359. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Meyer, M., Baldauf, S.L., Pawlowski, J., 2008. 
Evolution of dark-spored myxo- mycetes (slime-molds): molecules versus morphology. . Mol  Phylog  Evol  46, 878–889. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Nikolaev, S.I., Nelson, M., Pawlowski, J., Cavalier-Smith, T., Baldauf, S.L.,  2010. 
Deep phylogeny and evolution of slime moulds (Mycetozoa). . Protist 161, 55–70. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., 2011. . Genetic structure of two  protist species (Myxogastria, Amoebozoa) suggests asexual reproduction in sexual amoebae. 
 PLoS One 6, e22872. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Weinert, J., Wubet, T., Bonkowski, M., 2016. . Metacommunity analysis of  amoeboid protists in grassland soils. 
Sci  Rep  6, 19068   Foissner, W., 1999. . Protist diversity: estimates of the near imponderable. . Protist 150, 363–368. .  Foissner, W., 2006. 
Biogeography and dispersal of micro-organisms: a review emphasizing protists. .  Acta Protozool. 
45, 111–136. .  Foissner, W., 2008. 
Protist diversity and distribution: some basic considerations. . Biodiv  Conserv   17, 235–242. .  García, G., Ramos, F., Perez, R.G., Yañez, J., Estrada, M.S., Mendoza, L.H., Martinez-Hernandez,  F., Gaytan, P., 2014. 
Molecular epidemiology and genetic diversity of Entamoeba species in a  chelonian collection. . J  Med  Microbiol  63, 271–283. .  Gilbert, H.C., Martin, G.W., 1933. 
Myxomycetes found on the bark of living trees. . Univ  Iowa Stud   Nat  Hist  15, 3–8   Goad, A.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Myxomycetes appearing in moist chamber cultures on four  different types of dead leaves. . Mycosphere 4, 707–712. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    323 Götzsche, H.F., 1989. . Myxomycetes from Greenland. 
Opera Botan. . 100, 93–104. .  Götzsche, H.F., 1990. . Notes on Icelandic myxomycetes. 
Acta Botan. . Islandica 10, 3–21. .  Hagelstein, R., 1930. 
Mycetozoa from Jones Beach State Park. . Mycologia 22, 256–262. .  Hagelstein, R., 1944. 
Mycetozoa of North America. . Published by the author, Mineola, New York. .  Härkönen, M., 1977. . Corticolous myxomycetes in three different habitats in southern Finland. 
 Karstenia 17, 19–32. .  Härkönen, M., 1981. . Myxomycetes developed on litter of common Finnish trees in moist chamber  cultures. 
Nord  J  Bot  1, 791–794. .  Härkönen, M., 1988. . Some additions to the knowledge of Turkish myxomycetes. 
Karstenia 27,   1–7. .  Härkönen, M., Vänskä, H., 2004. 
Corticicolous myxomycetes and lichens in the Botanical Garden  in Helsinki, Finland: a comparison after decades of recovering from air pollution. . Syst  Geogr   Plants 74, 183–187. .  Hooff, J.P.M., 2009. . Cribraria tecta, a new myxomycete from Vietnam. 
Bol  Soc  Micol  Madrid  33, 129–136. .  Hoppe, T., Schwippert, W.W., 2014. 
Hydrophobicity of myxomycete spores: an undescribed aspect  of spore ornamentation. . Mycosphere 5, 601–606. .  Howard, H.J., 1948. 
The mycetozoa of sand-dunes and marshland. . Southeast  Nat  53, 26–30   Ing, B., 1967. 
Myxomycetes as sources of food for other organisms. . Proc  S  Lond  Entomol  Nat   Hist  Soc  1967, 18–23. .  Ing, B., 1968. . A census catalogue of british myxomycetes. 
Br  Mycol  Soc  Foray Comm. .  Ing, B., 1983. 
A ravine association of myxomycetes. . J  Biogeograph. 
10, 299–306. .  Ing, B., 1994. 
The phytosociology of myxomycetes. . New Phytol. 
126, 175–201. .  Kamono, A., Kojima, H., Matsumoto, J., Kawamura, K., Fukui, M., 2009. 
Airborne myxomycete  spores: detection using molecular techniques. . Naturwissenschaften 96, 147–151. .  Keller, H.W., Smith, D.M., 1978. 
Dissemination of myxomycete spores through the feeding activi- ties (ingestion-defecation) of an acarid mite. . Mycologia 70, 1239–1241. .  Keller, H.W., Snell, K.L., 2002. 
Feeding activities of slugs on myxomycetes and fungi. . Mycologia  94, 757–760. .  Kilgore, C.M., Keller, H.W., 2008. 
Interactions between myxomycete plasmodia and nematodes. .  Inoculum 59, 1–3. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Rosing, W.C., Ko Ko, Z.Z.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Myxomycetes of Myanmar. .  Sydowia 65, 267–276. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Lumyong, S., 2011. . Influence of seasonality on the  occurrence of myxomycetes. 
Chiang Mai J. . Sci  38, 71–84   Ko Ko, T.W., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Rojas, C., Lumyong, S., 2010a. . Patterns of occurrence  of myxomycetes on lianas. . Fungal Ecol. 
3, 302–310. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Tran, H.T.M., Clayton, M.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2012. . First records of myxomycetes  in Laos. 
Nova Hedwigia 96, 73–81. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Mitchell, D.W., Rojas, C., Hyde, K.D., Lumyong, S.,  2010b. . Myxomycetes of Thailand. 
Sydowia 62, 243–260. .  Kohlmeyer, J., 1969. . Ecological notes on fungi in mangrove forests. 
Trans  Br  Mycol  Soc  53,  237–250. .  Kosheleva, A.P., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity of the state reserve  “Stolby” (southeastern Siberia, Russia). . Fungal Diver. . 31, 45–62   Kowalski, D.T., 1975. 
The myxomycete taxa described by Charles Meylan. . Mycologia 67,  448–494. 
 324     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Kylin, J.H., 1991. . On the feeding habits of a tardigrade: selective foraging on myxomycetes. 
 Mycologist 5, 54–55. .  Kylin, H., Mitchell, D.W., Seraoui, E.H., Buyck, B., 2013. 
Myxomycetes from Papua New Guinea  and New Caledonia. . Fungal Diver. . 59, 33–44   Lado, C., 1994. 
A checklist of myxomycetes of Mediterranean countries. . Mycotaxon 52, 117–185. .  Lado, C., 2004. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes of the Iberian Peninsula: considerations on species rich- ness and ecological requirements. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 143–157. .  Lado, C., 2005–16. 
An online nomenclatural information system of Eumycetozoa. . Available from:  http://www.nomen.eumycetozoa.com Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Schnittler, M., 2003. . Biodi- versity assessment of myxomycetes from two tropical forest reserves in Mexico. . Fungal Diver. 
 12, 67–110. .  Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2007. 
Myxomycetes collected in the first phase of a  north-south transect of Chile. . Fungal Diver. 
25, 81–101. .  Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2017. . A  rapid biodiversity assessment of myxomycetes from a primary tropical moist forest of the Ama- zon basin in Ecuador. 
Nova Hedwigia 104, 293–321. .  Lado, C., Ronikier, A., 2008. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes from the Pyrenees: notes on the taxonomy  and species diversity. . Part 1  Physarales and Trichiales. . Nova Hedwigia 87, 337–360. .  Lado, C., Ronikier, A., 2009. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes from the Pyrenees: notes on the taxonomy  and species diversity. . Part 2  Stemonitales. . Nova Hedwigia 89, 131–145. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. . A review of Neotropical myxomycetes (1828–2008). 
Anal   Jard  Bot  Madrid 65, 211–254. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., 2011. . Biodiversity of Myxomycetes from the  Monte desert of Argentina. 
Anal  Jard  Bot  Madrid 68, 61–95. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., García-Carvajal, E., 2014. . Myxomycete diver- sity of the Patagonian Steppe and bordering areas in Argentina. 
Anal  Jard  Bot  Madrid 71, e0006. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., García-Carvajal, E., Aguilar, M., Hernández,  J.C., 2009. . Description of a new species of Perichaena (Myxomycetes) from arid areas of Ar- gentina. 
Anal  Madrid 66, 63–70. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
The biodiversity of  myxomycetes in Central Chile. . Fungal Diver. . 59, 3–32   Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. . Myxomycete diversity in  the coastal desert of Peru with emphasis on the lomas formation. 
Anal  Jard  Bot  Madrid 73, e032. .  Leontyev, D.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
A critical revision of the Tubifera ferrugi- nosa complex. . Mycologia 107, 959–985. .  Lindley, L.A., Stephenson, S.L., Spiegel, F.W., 2007. 
Protostelids and myxomycetes isolated from  aquatic habitats. . Mycologia 99, 504–509. 
 Linnaeus, C., 1753. . Species Plantarum. 
2 vols  Salvius, Stockholm. . Facsimile edition, 1957–1959,  Ray Society, London. . Lister, A., 1894. 
A Mongraph of the Mycetozoa, third ed. . British Museum of Natural History,  London, (Revised by G. . Lister)   Lister, A., 1911. 
A Mongraph of the Mycetozoa. . British Museum of Natural History, London,  (Revised by G. . Lister)   Lister, A., 1925. 
A Mongraph of the Mycetozoa. . British Museum of Natural History, London,  (Revised by G. . Lister)   Macabago, S.A.B., Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2010. 
Diversity and distribution of plasmodial  myxomycetes (slime molds) from La Mesa Ecopark, Quezon City, Philippines. . Biotropia 17, 51–61. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    325 Macabago, S.A.B., Dagamac, N.H.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2017. . Implications of  the role of dispersal on the occurrence of litter-inhabiting myxomycetes in different vegetation  types after a disturbance. 
Nova Hedwigia 104(1–3): 221–236. . Macabago, S.A.B., dela Cruz, T.E.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2012. . First records of myxomycetes from  Lubang Island, Occidental Mindoro, Philippines. 
Sydowia 64, 109–118. .  Macabago, S.A.B., Stephenson, S.L., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2016. 
Diversity and distribution of  myxomycetes in coastal and mountain forests of Lubang Island, Occidental Mindoro,  Philippines. . Mycosphere 7, 18–29. .  Maimoni-Rodella, R., Gottsberger, G., 1980. 
Myxomycetes from the forest and the Cerrado vegeta- tion in Botucatu, Brazil: a comparative ecological study. . Nova Hedwigia 34, 207–245. .  Martin, G., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa. .  Martiny   H J B    Bohannan   B J M    Brown   J H    Colwell   R K    Fuhrman   J A    Green   J L    Horner- Devine. .  M C    Kane   M    Krumins   J A    Kuske   C R    Morin   P J    Naeem   S    Øvreås   L     Reysenbach. 
 A L    Smith   V H    Staley   J T    2006  Microbial biogeography: putting microor- ganisms on the map. . Nat  Rev  Microbiol  4, 102–112. 
 Massee, G., 1892. . A Monograph of the Myxogasteres. 
Methuen and Company, London. .  Meylan, C., 1914. 
Remarques sur quelques espèces nivales de Myxomycètes. . Bull  Soc  Vaud  Sci   Nat  50, 1–14   Mitchell, D.W., 1995. 
The myxomycota of Australia. . Nova Hedwigia 60, 269–295. .  Mitchell, D.W., 2004. 
A key to the corticolous Myxomycota. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 261–285. .  Mitchell, E.A.D., Meisterfeld, R., 2005. 
Taxonomic confusion blurs the debate on cosmopolitanism  versus local endemism of free-living protists. . Protist 156, 263–267. .  Moreno, G., Singer, H., Illana, C., 2005. . A nivicolous species of Lamproderma from Japan. 
Bol   Soc  Micol  Madrid 29, 135–142. .  Moreno, G., Mitchell, D.W., Stephenson, S.L., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2009. . A new species of Craterium  (Myxomycetes) with reticulate spores. 
Bol  Soc  Micol  Madrid 33, 175–200. .  Mosquera, J., Lado, C., Beltran-Tejera, E., 2000. 
Morphology and ecology of Didymium subreticu- losporum. . Mycologia 92, 978–983. .  Müller, H., 2002. 
Beitrag zur Kenntnis und Verbreitung nivicoler Myxomyceten im Thüringer Wald. .  Zeit  Mykol  68, 199–208. .  Murray, P.M., Feest, A., Madelin, M.F., 1985. . The numbers of viable myxomycete cells in the ali- mentary tract of earthworms and in earthworm casts. 
Bot  J  Linnean Soc. . 91, 359–366. .  Ndiritu, G.G., Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2009a. 
Rapid biodiversity assessment of myxomy- cetes in two regions of Kenya. . Sydowia 61, 287–319. .  Ndiritu, G.G., Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2009b. 
Distribution and ecology of the assemblages  of myxomycetes associated with major vegetation types in Big Bend National Park, USA. .  Fungal Ecol. 
2, 168–183. .  Ndiritu, G.G., Winsett, K.E., Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2009c. 
A checklist of African myxo- mycetes. . Mycotaxon 107, 353–356. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Fefelov, K.A., 2000. 
An annotated checklist of the myxomycetes of Sverdlovsk  region, West Siberian Lowland, Russia. . Micol  Fitopatol  35, 41–52   Novozhilov, Y.K., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Schnittler, M., Aleksandrova, A.V., Popov, E.S.,  Kuznetsov, A.N., 2017a. 
Myxomycetes associated with monsoon lowland tall tropical forests  in southern Vietnam. . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 143–182. . Novozhilov, Y.K., Mitchell, D.W., 2014. 
A new species of Comatricha (Myxomycetes) from  southern Vietnam. . Nov  Sist  Nizsh  Rast  48, 188–195. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Mitchell, D.W., Schnittler, M., 2003. 
Myxomycete biodiversity of the Colorado  Plateau. . Mycol  Prog  2, 243–258. .  326     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Novozhilov, Y.K., Okun, M.V., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., García- Carvajal, E., Schnittler, M., 2013a. . Description, culture and phylogenetic position of a new  xerotolerant species of Physarum. . Mycologia 105, 1535–1546. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 1997. . Nivicole myxomycetes of the Khibine mountains (Kola  peninsula). 
Nordic J  Bot  16, 549–561. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity and ecology in arid regions of the  Great Lake Basin of western Mongolia. . Fungal Diver. 
30, 97–119. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Okun, M.V., Schepin, O.N., Heinrich, E., 2013b. 
 Diversity of nivicolous myxomycetes of the Teberda State Biosphere Reserve (Northwestern  Caucasus, Russia). . Fungal Diver. 
59, 109–130. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Schepin, O.N., 2017b. . Myxomycetes of the Sikhote- Alin State Nature Biosphere Reserve (Far East, Russia). . Nova Hedwigia 104 (1–3), 183–209. . Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of the Taimyr Peninsula  (north-central Siberia). . Karstenia 39, 77–97. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Vlasenko, A.V., Fefelov, K.A., 2009. 
Myxomycete diversity of the  Chuyskaya depression (Altay, Russia). . Mikol  Fitopatol  43, 522–534. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Vlasenko, A.V., Fevelov, K.A., 2010. 
Myxomycete diversity of the  Altay Mountains (southwestern Siberia, Russia). . Mycotaxon 111, 91–94. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Rollins, A.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2000. 
Myxomycetes from differ- ent forest types in Puerto Rico. . Mycotaxon 77, 285–299. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
A new species of Perichaena (Myxomycetes) with re- ticulate spores from southern Vietnam. . Mycologia 107, 137–141. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., 2006. 
A new species of Didymium (Myxomycetes) with re- ticulate spores. . Mycotaxon 96, 147–150. 
 Novozhilov, Y.K., Zemlianskaia, I.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2006. . Myxomycete diversity  and ecology in the arid regions of the Lower Volga River Basin (Russia). . Fungal Diver. 
23,  193–241. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Zemlyanskaya, I.V., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2008. 
Two new species  of Perichaena (Myxomycetes) from arid areas of Russia and Kazakhstan. . Mycologia 100,  816–822. .  Onipchenko, V.G., 2004. . Alpine Ecosystems in the Northwestern Caucasus. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht, NL. .  Ottewell, K., Grey, E., Castillo, F., Karubian, J., 2012. 
The pollen dispersal kernel and mating sys- tem of an insect-pollinated tropical palm, Oenocarpus bataua. . Heredity 109, 332–339. .  Pando, F., 1997. 
Bases corológicas de flora mycologica Iberica. . NUMS, 1224–1411, Cuad. . Trab   Fl  Micol  lbér  12, 111–112. .  Pando, F., Lado, C., 1990. 
A survey of the corticolous myxomycetes in Peninsular Spain and Bale- arte Islands. . Nova Hedwigia 50, 127–137. .  Pecundo, M.H., Dagamac, N.H.A., Stephenson, S.L., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2017. 
First myxomycete  survey in the limestone forest of Puerto Princesa Subterranean River National Park, Palawan,  Philippines. . Nova Hedwigia 104(1–3): 129–141. . Penet, L., Guyader, S., Pétro, D., Salles, M., Bussière, F., 2014. . Direct splash dispersal prevails over  indirect and subsequent spread during rains in Colletotrichum gloeosporioides infecting yams. 
 PLoS One 9, e115757. .  Rammeloo, J., 1975a. . Structure of the epispore in the Stemonitales (Myxomycetes) as seen with the  scanning electron microscope. 
Bull  Jard  Bot  Nat  Belgique 45, 301–306. .  Rammeloo, J., 1975b. . Structure of the epispore in the Trichiaceae (Trichiales, Myxomycetes), as  seen with the scanning electron microscope. 
Bull  Jard  Bot  Nat  Belgique 107, 353–359. .  Ramon, E., 1968. 
Myxomycetes of Israel. . Isr  J  Botany 17, 207–211. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    327 Rea-Maminta, M.A.D., Dagamac, N.H.A., Huyop, F.Z., Wahab, R.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015. .  Comparative diversity and heavy metal bisorption of myxomycetes from forest patches on ul- tramafic and volcanic soils. 
Chem  Ecol  31, 741–753. .  Reichenbach, H., 1993. 
Biology of the Myxobacteria: Ecology and Taxonomy. . American Society of  Microbiology, Washington DC. .  Robledo-Arnuncio, J.J., Gil, L., 2005. 
Patterns of pollen dispersal in a small population of Pinus  sylvestris L. . revealed by total-exclusion paternity analysis. . Heredity 94, 13–22. .  Rojas, C., Biffi, D., Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., 2008. 
Microhabitat and niche separation in  species of Ceratiomyxa. . Mycologia 100, 843–850. .  Rojas, C., Herrera, N., Stephenson, S.L., 2012a. . An update on the myxomycete biota (Amoebozoa:  Myxogastria) of Colombia. 
Check List 8, 617–619. .  Rojas, C., Morales, R.E., Calderón, I., Clerc, P., 2013. 
First records of myxomycetes from El Sal- vador. . Mycosphere 4, 1042–1051. .  Rojas, C., Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2010. . A review of the Costa Rican myxomycetes (Ame- bozoa). 
Brenesia 73–74, 39–57. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S.L., 2007. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in the high-elevation  oak forests of Cerro Bellavista, Costa Rica. . Mycologia 99, 534–543. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S.L., Huxel, G., 2011. 
Macroecology of high elevation myxomycete assem- blages in the northern Neotropics. . Mycol  Prog  10, 423–437. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S.L., Valverde, R., Estrada-Torres, A., 2012b. 
A biogeographical evaluation  of high-elevation myxomycete assemblages in the northern Neotropics. . Fungal Ecol. . 5, 99–113   Rojas, C., Valverde, R., Stephenson, S.L., 2015. 
New additions to the myxobiota of Costa Rica. .  Mycosphere 6, 709–715. .  Rollins, A.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2011. 
Global distribution and ecology of myxomycetes. . Curr  Top   Plant Biol. . 12, 1–14   Rollins, A.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Myxomycetes associated with grasslands of the western  central United States. . Fungal Diver. 
59, 147–158. .  Romeralo, M., Cavender, J.C., Landolt, J.C., Stephenson, S.L., Baldauf, S.L., 2011. 
An expanded  phylogeny of social amoebas (Dictyostelia) shows increasing diversity and new morphological  patterns. . BMC Evol  Biol  11, 84   Romeralo, M., Spiegel, F.W., Baldauf, S.L., 2010. . A fully resolved phylogeny of the social amoebas  (Dictyostelia) based on combined SSU and ITS rDNA sequences. . Protist 161, 539–548. .  Ronikier, A., Ronikier, M., 2009. 
How ‘alpine’ are nivicolous myxomycetes? A worldwide assess- ment of altitudinal distribution. . Mycologia 101, 1–16. .  Ronikier, A., Ronikier, M., Drozdowicz, A., 2008. 
Diversity of nivicolous myxomycetes in the  Gorce mountains—a low-elevation massif of the western Carpathians. . Mycotaxon 103,  337–352. .  Rosing, W.C., Mitchell, D.W., Moreno, G., Stephenson, S.L., 2011. 
Addition to the myxomycetes  of Singapore. . Pacific Sci. . 65, 391–400. .  Rostafinsky, J.T., 1875. . Sluzowce monografia. . Pamietn  Towarz  Nauk  Sci  Paryzu 6, 216–432. .  Santesson, R., 1948. 
Listerella paradoxa Jahn och Orcadella singularis (Jahn) nov. . comb., tvá für  Sverige nya myxomyceter. . Svensk Bot. 
Tids  42, 42–50   Saunders, J.E., Saunders, E., 1900. . The habitats of the Mycetozoa. 
Trans  Hertfordshire Nat. . Hist   Soc  10, 169–172. .  Schinner, F., 1983. 
Myxomycetes aus dem Gebiet des Torne Träsk (Abisko) in Schwedisch  Lappland. . Sydowia  Ann  Mycol  36, 269–276. .  Schinner, F., Kobilansky, C., Kolm, H., 1990. 
Ein Beitrag zur Ökologie der Myxomyceten. . Beit   Kenn  Pilze Mittel. 
5, 15–18   328     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Schnittler, M., 2000. . Foliicolous liverworts as a microhabitat for Neotropical Myxomycetes. 
Nova  Hedwigia 72, 259–270. .  Schnittler, M., 2001. 
Ecology of Myxomycetes of a winter-cold desert in western Kazakhstan. .  Mycologia 93, 653–669. .  Schnittler, M., Dagamac, N.H.A., Sauke, M., Wilmking, M., Buras, A., Ahlgrimm, S., Eusemann,  P., 2016. 
Ecological factors limiting occurrence of corticolous myxomycetes: a case study from  Alaska. . Fungal Ecol. . 21, 16–23   Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Heinrich, E., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2015a. 
Four years in  the Caucasus: observations on the ecology of nivicolous myxomycetes. . Fungal Ecol. 
14, 105–115. .  Schnittler, M., Kummer, V., Kuhnt, A., Krieglsteiner, L., Flatau, L., Müller, M., 2011. . Rote Liste und  Gesamtartenliste der Schleimpilze (Myxomycetes) Deutschlands. 
Schr  R  Veget  70, 125–234. .  Schnittler, M., Lado, C., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Rapid biodiversity assessment of a tropical myxo- mycete assemblage: Maquipucuna Cloud Forest Reserve, Ecuador. . Fungal Diver. 
9, 135–167. .  Schnittler, M., Mitchell, D.W., 2000. . Species diversity in Myxomycetes based on the morphological  species concept: a critical examination. 
Stapfia 73, 55–61. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 1996. . The myxomycetes of boreal woodlands in Russian northern  Karelia: a preliminary report. 
Karstenia 36, 19–40. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 1998. 
Late-autumn myxomycetes of the Northern Ammergauer  Alps. . Nova Hedwigia 66, 205–222. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2000. 
Myxomycetes of the winter-cold desert in western Kazakh- stan. . Mycotaxon 74, 267–285. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Carvajal, E., Spiegel, F.W., 2013. 
Myxomycete diversity in the  Tarim basin and eastern Tian-Shan, Xinjiang province, China. . Fungal Diver. 
59, 91–108. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Romeralo, M., Brown, M., Spiegel, F.W., 2012. . Myxomycetes  and myxomycete-like organisms. 
In: Frey, W. . (Ed.), Englers Syllabus of Plant Families, 4,  Bornträger, Stuttgart, pp. . 12–88   Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Shadwick, J.D.L., Spiegel, F.W., García-Carvajal, E., König, P.,  2015b. 
What substrate cultures can reveal: myxomycetes and myxomycete-like organisms from  the Sultanate of Oman. . Mycosphere 6, 356–384. .  Schnittler, M., Shchepin, O., Dagamac, N.H.A., Borg Dahl, M., Novozhilov, Y.K. . 2017  Barcoding  myxomycetes with molecular markers: challenges and opportunities. 
Nova Hedwigia 104, 183–209. . Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2000. 
Myxomycete biodiversity in four different forest types in  Costa Rica. . Mycologia 92, 626–637. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Inflorescences of Neotropical herbs as a newly discovered  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 94, 6–20. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2000. 
Ecology and world distribution of  Barbeyella minutissima (Myxomycetes). . Mycol  Res  104, 1518–1523. .  Schnittler, M., Tesmer, J., 2008. . A habitat colonisation model for spore-dispersed organisms: does  it work with eumycetozoans? Mycol. 
Res  112, 697–707. .  Schnittler, M., Unterseher, M., Pfeiffer, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Fiore-Donno, A.M., 2010. 
Ecology  of sandstone ravine myxomycetes from Saxonian Switzerland (Germany). . Nova Hedwigia 90,  227–302. .  Schnittler, M., Unterseher, M., Tesmer, J., 2006. 
Species richness and ecological characterization of  myxomycetes and myxomycete-like organisms in the canopy of a temperate deciduous forest. .  Mycologia 98, 223–232. .  Shchepin, O., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2014. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes in agar culture:  some results and open problems. . Protistology 8, 53–61. .  Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    329 Singer, H., Moreno, G., Illana, C., 2005. . A taxonomic review on the nivicolous species described by  Kowalski. . I  Order Stemonitales. 
Mycol  Prog  4, 3–10   Snell, K.L., Keller, H.W., Eliasson, U.H., 2003. . Tree canopy myxomycetes and new records from  ground sites in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. 
Castanea 68, 97–108. .  Spiegel, F.W., Stephenson, S.L., Keller, H.W., Moore, D.L., Cavender, J.C., 2004. . Mycetozoans. . In:  Mueller, G.M., Bills, G.F., Foster, M.S. 
(Eds.), Biodiversity of Fungi. . Inventory and Monitoring  Methods. . Elsevier Academic Press, Amsterdam, pp. . 547–576, Part IId. .  Stephenson, S.L., 2004. . Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in southern Appalachian subal- pine coniferous forests. 
Mem  NY Botan  Gard  89, 203–212. .  Stephenson, S.L., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Schnittler, M., 2011. 
Myxomycetes in soil. . Soil Biol  Bio- chem  43, 2237–2242. .  Stephenson, S.L., Landolt, J., 2015. 
Occurrence of myxomycetes in the aerial “canopy soil” micro- habitat. . Mycosphere 6, 74–77. .  Stephenson, S.L., Landolt, J.C., Moore, D.L., 1999. 
Protostelids, dictyostelids, and myxomycetes in the  litter microhabitat of the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico. . Mycol  Res  103, 209–214. .  Stephenson, S.L., Laursen, G.A., 1993. 
A preliminary report on the distribution and ecology of  myxomycetes in Alaskan tundra. . Bibl  Mycol  150, 251–257. .  Stephenson, S.L., Laursen, G.A., 1998. 
Myxomycetes from Alaska. . Nova Hedwigia 66, 425–434. .  Stephenson, S.L., Laursen, G.A., Seppelt, R.D., 2007. 
Myxomycetes of subantarctic Macquarie  Island. . Aust  J  Botany 55, 439–449. .  Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2000. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes  in high-latitude regions of the northern hemisphere. . J  Biogeograph. 
27, 741–754. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., 2016. . Myxomycetes. . In: Archibald, J.M., Simpson, A.G.B.,  Slamovits, C.H. 
(Eds.), Handbook of the Protists. . Springer, New York. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Landolt,  J.C., Novozhilov, Y.K., Clark, J., Moore, D.L., Spiegel, F.W., 2004. . Studies of neotropical my- cetozoans. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 87–108. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., Mitchell, D.W., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2001. 
Myxomycetes of the  Great Smoky Mountains National Park. . Mycotaxon 78, 1–15. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnttler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity and distribution  from the fossil record to the present. . Biodiv  Conserv  17, 285–301. .  Stephenson, S.L., Shadwick, J.D.L., 2009. . Nivicolous myxomycetes from alpine areas of south- eastern Australia. 
Aust  J  Bot  57, 116–122. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A handbook of slime molds. 
Timber Press  Inc., USA. .  Sutherland, J.B., 1979. . Gray jay feeding on slime mold. 
Murrelet 60, 122. .  Swanson, A.R., Spiegel, F.W., Cavender, J.C., 2002. 
Taxonomy, slime molds, and the questions we  ask. . Mycologia 94, 968–979. .  Takahashi, K., 2004. 
Distribution of myxomycetes on different decay states of deciduous broadleaf  and coniferous wood in a natural temperate forest in the southwest of Japan. . Syst  Geogr  Plants  74, 133–142. .  Takahashi, K., Hada, Y., 2012. 
Seasonal occurrence and distribution of myxomycetes on different  types of leaf litter in a warm temperate forest of western Japan. . Mycoscience 53, 245–255. .  Takahashi, K., Harakon, Y., 2012. 
Comparison of wood-inhabiting myxomycetes in subalpine and  montane coniferous forests in the Yatsugatake Mountains of Central Japan. . J  Plant Res  125,  327–337. .  Tamayama, M., 2000. . Nivicolous taxa of the myxomycetes in Japan. 
Stapfia 73, 121–129. .  330     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Tesmer, J., Schnittler, M., 2007. . Sedimentation velocity of myxomycete spores. 
Mycol  Prog  6,  229–234. .  Torres-Machorro, A.L., Hernández, R., Cevallos, A.M., López-Villaseñor, I., 2010. . Ribosomal  RNA genes in eukaryotic microorganisms: witnesses of phylogeny? FEMS Microbiol. 
Rev   34, 59–86. .  Townsend, J.H., Aldrich, H.C., Wilson, L.D., McCranie, J.R., 2005. 
First report of sporangia of  a myxomycete (Physarum pusillum) on the body of a living animal, the lizard Corytophanes  cristatus. . Mycologia 97, 346–348. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Mongkolporn, O., 2006. 
Distribution and occurrence  of myxomycetes in tropical forests of northern Thailand. . Fungal Diver. 
22, 227–242. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Hyde, K.D., Mongkolporn, O., 2008. 
Distribution and occurrence  of myxomycetes on agricultural ground litter and forest floor litter in Thailand. . Mycologia 100,  181–190. .  Tu, Y., Xiao, F., Zhang, J., Lu, Q., Wang, L., 2016. 
Two “myxomycete diseases” occurred on culti- vated fields of Dendrobium candidum. . J  Zhejiang Univ. . 42, 137–142. .  Ukkola, T., Häarkönen, M., Saarimäki, T., 1996. . Tanzanian myxomycetes: second survey. 
Karstenia  36, 51–77. .  Urich, T., Lanzén, A., Qi, J., Huson, D.H., Schleper, C., Schuster, S.C., 2008. 
Simultaneous as- sessment of soil microbial community structure and function through analysis of the meta- transcriptome. . PLoS One 3, e2527. .  Vlasenko, A.V., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2011. 
Myxomycetes of pine forests of the right-bank part of the  Upper Ob River. . Mikol  Fitopatol  45, 1–13   Vlasenko, A.V., Novozhilov, Y.K., Shchepin, O.N., Vlasenko, V.A., 2016. . Hydrochory as certain  mode of distribution of myxomycetes along floodlands in south of Western Siberia. 
Mikol   Fitopatol. . 50, 14–23, [In Russian with English abstract]. .  Walker, L.M., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. 
The species problem in myxomycetes revisited. . Protist 167  (4), 319–338. .  Wheeler, Q.D., 1984. 
Associations of beetles with slime molds: ecological patterns in the Anisoto- mini (Leiodidae). . Bull  Entomol  Soc  Am  39, 14–18   Winsett, K.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2008. . Using ITS sequences to assess intraspecific genetic relation- ships among geographically separated collections of the myxomycete Didymium squamulo- sum. . Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 59–65   Winsett, K.E., Stephenson, S.L., 2011. 
Global distribution and molecular diversity of Didymium  difforme. . Mycosphere 2, 135–146. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 1998. . Myxomycetes from the bark of the evergreen oak Quercus ilex. 
Anal   Jard  Bot  Madrid 56, 3–14. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2000. . Acid deposition in Madrid and corticolous myxomycetes. 
Stapfia  73, 113–120. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., 2012. 
Description and life cycle of a new  Physarum (Myxomycetes) from the Atacama Desert in Chile. . Mycologia 104 (5), 1206–1212. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2009. 
Description and life  cycle of a new Didymium (Myxomycetes) from arid areas of Argentina and Chile. . Mycologia  101, 707–716. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2010. . Biodiversity of  myxomycetes in subantarctic forests of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, Argentina. 
Nova  Hedwigia 90, 45–79. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Biodiversity studies  of myxomycetes in Madagascar. . Fungal Diver. . 59, 55–83   Biogeographical Patterns in Myxomycetes  Chapter | 9    331 Wrigley de Basanta, D., Stephenson, S.L., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Nieves-Rivera, A.M., 2008. .  Lianas as a microhabitat for myxomycetes in tropical forests. . Fungal Diver. 
28, 109–125. .  Yajima, Y., Nishikawa, T., Yamamoto, Y., 2006. 
Studies on the myxomycetes of Hikkaido, Japan  (II). . Nivicolous species of Mount Asahidake in the Taisetsu Mountains. 
Rep  Taiset  Inst  Sci   40, 53–57. .  Yamamoto, Y., 1998. . The myxomycete biota of Japan. 
Toyo Shorin Publishing Co., Ltd, Tokyo,  Japan. .  Yamni, K., Meyer, M., 2008. 
Myxomycetes succulenticoles du sud-ouest morocain. . Bol  Soc   Micol  Madrid 32, 121–125. .  FURTHER READING Beltran, E., Lado, C., Barrera, J., Gonzalez, E., 2004. 
Myxomycete diversity in the Laurel forest of  Garajonay National Park (Canary Islands, Spain). . Syst  Geogra  Plants 74, 159–173. .  Castillo, A., Illana, C., Moreno, G., 1998. 
Protophysarum phloiogenum and a new family in the  Physarales. . Mycol  Res  102, 838–842. .  Lado, C., Mosquera, J., Beltrán-Tejera, E., 1999. 
Cribraria zonatispora, development of a new  myxomycete with unique spores. . Mycologia 91, 157–165. .  Ronikier, A., Lado, C., 2015. 
Nivicolous Stemonitales (Myxomycetes) from the Austral Andes. .  Analysis of morphological variability, distribution and phenology as a first step towards testing  the large-scale coherence of species and biogeographical properties. 
Mycologia 107, 258–283. .  Page left intentionally blank 333 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00010-X Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 10 Techniques for Recording  and Isolating Myxomycetes Diana Wrigley de Basanta*. .  Arturo Estrada-Torres** *Royal Botanic Garden (CSIC). .  Madrid   Spain; **Behavioural Biology Centre. 
 The Autonomous  University of Tlaxcala. .  Tlaxcala   Mexico INTRODUCTION The first myxomycete ever recorded was reported in “Herbarium Portatile” by  Panckow (1654). .  where a collection of what is now known as Lycogala epiden- drum was illustrated and entitled “fungi cito crescentes” (literally “mushroom  of rapid growth”). . There is also a brief note on its rapid development in the  volume, which is currently held at the Natural History Museum in London, and  was examined by the first author in 2006. . Lister (1918) also reported records of  what is thought to be the same species, published by the English naturalist John  Ray in 1696. . A detailed history of the study of these organisms can be found  in Chapter 2. 
Since then, recording myxomycetes has been carried out for a variety of rea- sons, for pleasure, interest, and scientific study, from random collecting during  a foray to more structured work. . Many people have observed, searched for and  found myxomycetes, setting up personal collections or adding to official her- baria in many countries. . Historically, as well as currently, collectors have some- times sent samples and exsiccata to known experts, who have exchanged these  with individuals from all around the world. . For example. .  a large number of  samples were sent to Lister and his daughter. 
 Gulielma   in the United  Kingdom. .   including some from the Emperor Hirohito of Japan. .  a myxomycete enthusi- ast. .  who in 1928 hand-carried samples of Hemitrichia imperialis from Japan to  London for study by the Listers. . The samples still exist in the herbarium of the  Natural History Museum in London (Lado and Wrigley de Basanta, in press). 
 This work. .  to collect and record myxomycetes. .  has traditionally been done by  mycologists. 
 because these mostly visible microorganisms develop in habitats  similar to those in which many different kinds of fungi are found. . Myxomyce- tes can be recorded and isolated from the field where they are produced under   natural conditions, or from laboratory culture by several different methods. . 334     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology FIELD COLLECTIONS Myxomycetes are mainly recognized. .  recorded and/or collected in the sporulat- ing or fruiting body stage of the life cycle. 
 and current field collecting techniques  normally involve fairly straightforward protocols. .  such as those outlined by Ste- phenson and Stempen (1994) or Ing (1999). 
The myxomycetes feed as unicellu- lar stages (amoeboflagellates) or plasmodia, primarily on bacteria and other or- ganic matter, in or on decaying plant material. . They emerge from the substrate  to produce the fruiting bodies, and these are often found on the surfaces of plant  parts or remains from which they can be easily removed. 
The first step involved  in collecting is to determine and select an area, habitat (Fig. . 10.1A) or micro- habitat to study. .  and then the most common method is to search all the known  plant substrates or substrate groups where these organisms may be expected to  develop. 
 in a systematic manner and usually for a specified time. . For example,  in the survey of the coastal desert of Peru (Lado et al., 2016), four researchers  collected in each specific locality for an hour. . The localities were along prede- termined North–South and West–East transects at intervals of approximately  25–50 km. .  to cover the maximum possible terrain in this very extensive belt  of arid landscape. 
Schnittler et al. . (2002) used 200 m transects at each study  site and collected substrates for moist chamber cultures at 10 m intervals along  these transects. . In a 4-year study by Eliasson (1981), a marked route, in a study  area 160 m × 120 m, was surveyed 2–3 times a week. 
Rodríguez-Palma (2003)  established nine sampling stations in the fir forest on the summit of the Malintzi  Volcano in Mexico. . The sampling units were three fallen logs in each. 
 and the  myxomycete fruiting bodies on these were collected once a week in the rainy  season (June–September) and every 2 weeks in the dry cold season (October– May). . Transects can also be used in more detailed protocols where specific  measured plots are set up, as they were for a very comprehensive biodiversity  inventory in Costa Rica (Rossman et al., 1998). . Within the habitat or microhabitat. .  the substrate type determines the method  used in searching for fruiting bodies. .  but it generally involves the use of a pock- etknife or pruning clippers to remove small pieces of substrate supporting the  fruiting bodies. 
Other useful equipment includes a good hand lens (with at least  10× magnification) to detect smaller specimens and a GPS receiver to deter- mine the geographic coordinates of the sample and the elevation. . These data are  essential not only for confirmation or repetition of results, but also for any stud- ies assessing accurate geographic distribution of species. . A camera is also very  valuable for recording and documenting the general habitat and the microhabitat  of the specimen collected, and for later confirmation of substrate plant identity. .  A portable plant specimen dryer is sometimes necessary in very humid environ- ments or seasons. 
Some places to examine within the habitat would include all  surfaces of logs (Fig. . 10 1C)   other pieces of dead wood and old tree trunks. 
  particularly in cracks or crevices. .  but mainly the lower surface. .   especially if  the substrate is exposed to the sun. .  twigs   leaf litter that has accumulated. 
 for  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    335 instance. .  under a shrub (Fig. . 10.1E) or tree, and especially if there is some but  not too much moisture present. . Lifting the top drier layer with care will often  reveal fruiting bodies on the slightly moist. .  sometimes compacted lower layer. 
  and turning over individual leaves and examining the underside is also use- ful. . Bark on living trees will sometimes have observable fruiting  bodies in the  FIGURES 10.1 Habitats or microhabitats where myxomycetes can be found. . (A) Forests,  such as this one in Madagascar. . (B) Leaves of rosette plants, such as Puya spp. 
(C) On logs, like  this collection of a Stemonitis. . (D) On the remains of cacti like this B. 
melanospora. . Photo: Adam  W. . Rollins  (E) On leaf litter under a shrub, such as this Zygophyllum stapfii in Namibia. . (F) At the  edge of melting snow. 
336     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology field, although this substrate is often taken for later culture in the laboratory, as  discussed later. . In certain habitats, such as the drylands of the Americas, the  inside of decaying cacti stems, or cladodes (Fig. . 10.1D), produce many myxo- mycetes, and the extent of the decay is favored by different species. 
In addition,  the bases of the dead leaves of rosette plants, such as Puya spp. . (Fig  10.1B)  or Agave spp.. .  especially in areas between the more decayed softer leaves. 
 are  productive substrates (Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2009) where fruiting bodies can  last for several months in spite of the surrounding dryness. . Stout gardening or  hedger’s gloves are necessary for field collecting of these and some other sub- strates. .  although sometimes even these will not fully protect one against spines. 
  trichomes. .  and glochids. 
Gloves are particularly essential in tropical and sub- tropical areas where it is not uncommon to disturb scorpions. .  snakes   poisonous  spiders and poisonous plants while searching leaf litter. .  logs or the remains of  succulent plants. . Ing (1994). 
 in his paper on the phytosociology of myxomycetes. .  discussed  more than 15 potential substrate types where these organisms may be found and  points out that the surface on which they fruit can sometimes be different from  where they carry out their feeding stages as amoeboflagellates or plasmodia. .  as  is the case for certain foliicolous species. 
As the myxomycete fruiting bodies are produced ephemerally, it is neces- sary to carry out sampling over time and with a variety of methods. . The sporu- lation phenology of different species of myxomycetes from trees in Mediter- ranean woodlands. 
 for instance. .  was discussed in detail by Lado (1993). 
 and  showed distinct differences in the months of maximum appearance. .  dependent  on available water and limited by temperature extremes. 
The author concluded  that the sporulation phenology in these woodlands was also different from stud- ies carried out at different latitudes. . In work by Stephenson (1988) in forests  of southwestern Virginia in the United States. .  the optimum time for the ap- pearance of myxomycete fruiting bodies was July. 
 a poor collecting time in  the Mediterranean woodlands. . In Sweden, on the other hand, there are species  that appear in the spring, others in the summer or autumn and still others from  May to October (Eliasson, 1981). . Therefore, the optimum time for collecting  myxomycetes in the field varies considerably according to the geographic area  and the species sought. 
The patterns of temperature and available moisture are the main limiting  factors determining their appearance. .  but the range of tolerance of these param- eters varies for different species and many species can be recorded from areas  of extreme climatic conditions. .  for instance. 
 from the edge of melting snow  (Fig. . 10.1F), as indicated in several studies (Kowalski, 1971; Lado et al., 2005;  Ronikier and Ronikier, 2009). . This ecological group of nivicolous species can  appear in large and conspicuous fruitings on ground litter and the lower stems of  living shrubs. 
In such situations. .  temperatures can be just above freezing when  covered with snow. .  even if the air temperatures are lower. .  due to the insulating  effect of the snow itself. 
 which also buffers the abrupt day and night  temperature  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    337 fluctuation (Lado. .  2004)  This author included, in a detailed  account of nivico- lous myxomycetes in Spain and Portugal, valuable comments on their ecologi- cal requirements. . He indicated that the abundance of myxomycetes in the high  mountains. .  coinciding with the snow melt. 
 can mean that four or five different  species could be found in an area as small as a square meter (Lado. .  2004)  The  nivicolous myxomycetes, as well as others, have been keyed and beautifully il- lustrated in the volumes by Poulain et al. . (2011)  The ecology of this group of  myxomycetes in a biosphere reserve in Russia was investigated by  Schnittler  et al. 
(2015), who recorded more than 1000 fruitings in their survey over a pe- riod of 4 years. . Using a transect system of 50 m circular plots, weather data and  data loggers to monitor conditions beneath the snow. . These authors found that  observed fluctuations in the abundance of nivivolous myxomycetes from year to  year are most probably due to climatic factors. .  such as insufficient snow depth  or sharp frost when there is little or no snow cover (Schnittler et al.. 
 2015)   Ronikier and Lado (2015) discussed differences between myxomycete assem- blages and the optimum times for the appearance of nivicolous species between  different geographic regions. . They suggested that the appearance of strictly  nivicolous species. 
 outside the normal snow-melt period. .  may indicate some  special climatic conditions restricted to the southern hemisphere. .  since some  species have been collected there even in the austral summer (Lado et al.. 
 2013;  Stephenson et al.. .  2007; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2010)  When recording field collections, it is necessary to decide what is a collec- tion or record of a species. 
A plasmodium could be considered to be an indi- vidual. .  but some species of myxomycetes produce just one aethalium from a   plasmodium and others up to hundreds of fruiting bodies. .  all from one plas- modium. . Smaller species may have many protoplasmodia, all producing an   individual fruiting body but with many close together and at the same time. 
As Eliasson (1981) pointed out. .  the use of determinants is arbitrary. 
 but a  reasonable practical compromise in the field is to consider fruiting bodies of the  same species. .  that are at least 30 cm apart. 
 as different collections. . Stephenson  (1988) also used this definition of a collection in a field study of myxomycetes  in the upland forests of southwestern Virginia. 
The method used by Feest and  Madelin (1985a). .  to quantify the myxomycetes present in the soil. .  established  the number of plasmodium-forming units (PFU) present. 
 but this method does  not measure separate species and depends on the species capability of develop- ing under culture conditions. . A simple method of approximating numbers to  find the relative abundance of a species was suggested by Stephenson et al. 
 (1993) and is often used in surveys. . It is a scale of the proportion of a species in  the total number of collections and goes from A (abundant >3% of all collec- tions) to R (rare, 0.5% of all collections). 
Any specimens collected in the field are usually carried back in boxes. .  Some collectors use a box lined with cork and secure the specimens with pins  (Ing. .  1999)   but others place them in plastic boxes of the type used to store  nails and screws or fishing bait (Spiegel et al.. 
 2007)  Specimens can also be  338     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology mounted with glue into cardboard boxes. .  like matchboxes. 
 which is particu- larly advisable for transporting small delicate specimen. . Specimens can be air- dried in open containers once back in either the laboratory or a working area  (Fig. . 10.2A) or the plant drier mentioned earlier can be used in more humid  environments. 
Specimens are glued onto cardboard boxes, or card trays placed  in boxes that then serve for storage in the herbarium or a private collection. .  FIGURES 10.2 Laboratory culture. . (A) Field collections air-drying. . (B) Moist chamber cul- tures. . (C) Laboratory equipment for observing agar cultures. 
(D) Myxamoebae. . (E) A phaneroplas- modium. . (F) A sporocarp forming on agar. 
Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    339 These cardboard boxes often come in flat packs. .  which are easy to transport to  the collecting locality. .  where they can be readily assembled for use. 
Specimen  are usually glued on the top of the box so that they are never separated from  the label. . Some useful tools at this point are fine forceps, a hand lens, a good  portable light source, scissors, and pruning clippers for cleaning and separating  the specimens. . The label should include the genus and species (to the extent that  can be determined). .  the unique collection number. 
 the substrate. .  the country. .   province. .  geographic coordinates. .  elevation. 
 date of collection. .  and the name of  the collector. 
Some researchers include other data, such as the type of vegeta- tion of the area and data on the microhabitat. . If material is to be collected in a  country other than one’s own, certain permits are probably required, although  the procedures required to obtain such a permit in each country vary widely. .  It is invaluable for these formalities to count on the cooperation of scientists  working in the country involved. . In addition. 
 many substrate plants could be  subject to the Cites convention and require special collecting and export per- mits (https://www.cites.org). .  and since 2014 probably come under the Nagoya  protocol. .  an international treaty that prohibits the collection of plant material  without an agreement with host countries and sharing of benefits (https://www. . cbd.int/abs). 
Field Collections: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints The advantages of collecting specimens of myxomycetes in the field are many. .  First   the researcher can be sure that the particular species has developed there  under natural conditions. .  and therefore the morphology and development. .  es- pecially in large collections. .  will be reliable. 
Field-collected specimens are fre- quently present in large fruitings consisting of many individual fruiting bodies. .   thus showing a range of morphological characters and providing sufficient ma- terial to send duplicates to other herbaria. . This is particularly important when  the collections are used to describe a new species, and it allows for a more  complete description, avoiding narrow and imprecise species concepts. . Certain  species will be collected only in the field, as they have not yet been obtained  in laboratory culture. . These include larger species of the genera Fuligo, Lyco- gola, or Tubifera, for instance. . Some lignicolous species from decaying wood,  like certain species of Cribraria, can also be collected only in the field. 
A very  important benefit of collecting in the field is time. . Even fairly comprehensive  biodiversity field surveys can be completed in a few weeks (Wrigley de Basanta  et al.. .  2013)   and the field results are immediate. .  although any subsequent cul- ture work takes longer. .  as discussed later. 
Several hours are sufficient to survey  a particular vegetation type in any given locality (Novozhilov et al.. .  2000) or  even 1 h each at multiple-staged collecting sites (Lado et al.. .  2014) along a  transect. 
The main constraints of field collecting are the effects of temperature. .  and  water availability on the myxomycetes. .  and the ability of the investigator to  340     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology coincide with the sporulation phenology of the maximum number of species in  an area. 
As discussed earlier, taxa, such as Ceratiomyxa spp., can appear at the  beginning of the local rainy season, whereas others appear only at the end of  the rains. . The latter is the case for many species of Diderma. 
This makes it es- sential to sample at different times of the year or in different years, but this can  be difficult or too costly for remote regions and areas where access is a problem. . The cost of field collecting is a very real constraint, which can run into liter- ally thousands of dollars for a 3-week collecting trip. . Further problems can be  encountered with the conditions that exist at the collecting sites. 
 such as high   elevations or extreme temperatures. .  as is the case in the arid areas of the Ameri- cas that we have been studying for the last 15 years (http://www.myxotropic. . org)  In addition, native animal or plant hazards, or inaccessible substrates, such  as up on a rock face, on a remote island, or in the middle of a desert can compli- cate collecting. . Many small species cannot be detected in the field and thus may  be underrepresented in surveys that are based exclusively on field collections. . Time can also be a major constraint, as well as an advantage, depending  on the type of survey. 
An estimate by Novozhilov et al. . (2000) suggested  2–4 months for a regional study, but this will depend of course on the size of the  region, on the objectives and the thoroughness of the study. . It will often take  repeated surveys throughout the year to coincide with seasonality of all species,  and ideally repeated annual visits at different times to properly survey an area. 
 In arid areas, samples can be old and withered and in humid areas frequently  moldy. . This can render difficult or impossible, the correct identification of spe- cies, in spite of all efforts to collect at a favorable season, because this is often  difficult to determine. . Some material can be destroyed in transit from the field,  particularly small delicate species, and other organisms, such as beetles, spring- tails, or mites, can inadvertently be carried with them. . ISOLATION OF MYXOMYCETES BY LABORATORY CULTURE Moist Chamber Cultures A method of obtaining myxomycetes in addition to. 
 or instead of. .  field collected  specimens. .  is the use in the laboratory of what are known as moist chamber  cultures (Fig. . 10 2B)  The use of the moist chamber culture method of isolating  myxomycetes is often attributed to Gilbert and Martin (1933). .  who used the  technique to allow algae to develop but then found it to be a valuable method  for isolating myxomycetes. . They described the method of removing the bark  from various aspects of trees and placing it in culture and added a list of species  isolated from their cultures. 
However   long before this. .  Lister (1894) described  the development of plasmodia in a moist chamber from material gathered in  the field and his daughter (Lister. .  1918) stated how he had cultivated Badhamia  utricularis at home and set up “glass boxes” where he gave the myxomycete  plasmodia a “variety of food.” In the first edition of his monograph. .  Lister  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    341 (1894) gives details of various experiments relating to feeding and nuclear divi- sion of different stages in the life history of these organisms. . In a later paper  (Lister, 1901), he explained how to culture them from spores. . Collection of material for later moist chamber culture involves several stag- es. 
The most meaningful use of this technique, when carrying out a biodiversity  survey of large areas, is in conjunction with field collecting as described earlier. .  At field localities, suitable material for culture can be extracted at the same time  as the collections encountered fruited in situ. . This means that the two types of  collections are complimentary to each other and often the same species will occur  in both. . However, this is not always the case, as the conditions in moist chamber  cultures are obviously different from the natural conditions at the time of collec- tion. . The samples can be bark of living trees (Everhart et al.. 
 2008   2009; Scar- borough et al.. .  2009)   leaf litter. .  specific plant litter. 
 for example. .  dead pieces of  the epidermis or interior tissue of cacti or other succulent plants. .  dried inflores- cences (Schnittler and Stephenson. .  2002)   on bryophytes in ravines (Ing. 
 1983)    dry fruits. .  droppings of herbivorous animals (Eliasson. 
 2013; Eliasson and  Lundquist. .  1979)   lianas (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2008)   twigs (Stephenson  et al.. .  2008)   small pieces of wood. 
 grasses (Rollins and Stephenson. .  2013)   or  other plant remains. . As in field collecting, sometimes very specific protocols are  necessary for collecting the substrate. . For example. .  the bark of living trees must  be carefully removed with a knife or fine chisel and care must be taken to avoid  lifting phloem or inner tissue from the tree (Ing. 
 1999; Mitchell. .  1980; Stephen- son. 
 1989)  In a study of the aerial reproductive structures of five representative  plant families (Kilgore et al.. .  2009) a special rope-climbing technique was used  for collection of aerial parts from the tops of tall trees. 
This technique, devel- oped by Keller (2004) has been used to collect myxomycetes both in the field  and for substrate collection for culturing corticolous myxomycetes. . Other types  of substrates, such as soils  (Clarholm, 1981; Feest, 1987), have slightly different  collecting protocols, specific to the substrate being collected. . The moist chamber culture technique can be used in many other types of  study, too. 
For example. .  it has been used to study one specific substrate over a  range of parameters. .  such as bark productivity versus tree height (Keller. 
 2004;  Scarborough et al.. .  2009)   acid rain effects on a specific type of tree bark  (Wrigley de Basanta. .  2000)   to investigate the myxobiota over a given area   (Kosheleva et al.. .  2008; Ukkola et al.. .  1996)   or to examine a family of sub- strates to see the different productivity of each (Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2009)    to name just a few. 
The technique can also be used for quantitative studies to  improve our understanding of the biodiversity and ecology of myxomycetes,  such as those discussed by Novozhilov et al. . (2000)  Unless some special technique is required, the collected substrate samples,  are placed in strong paper bags and allowed to air dry naturally. . In very moist  places. .  such as tropical rain forests. .  it can be difficult to dry samples and a  plant drier can be useful in these situations or even a domestic hair dryer (with  a cool setting and located at some distance) could be used as a last resort. 
Each  342     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology sample should be labeled with the locality, name, type of substrate and date of  collection. . One example would be to use a three-letter code for the country, the  year, and then sequential numbers for the locality, such as ARG 08-16, a sample  collected at locality 16 in 2008 in Argentina. . In this case. 
 the country code is  followed by the collector’s numbering system. .  the name of the substrate and  the date (e.g.. .  dwb 1524   remains of Oreocereus trolli. 
 xx-xx-2008) on each  substrate bag. . The preparation of material in the field by bagging, drying, and  numbering could be the same for any of the studies mentioned earlier. . Once back in the laboratory, the series of samples are usually placed in ster- ile 9 cm plastic Petri dishes on Whatman number one filter paper (Fig. . 10.2B),  although other containers can be used, and some investigators use other types of  absorbent paper (Schnittler et al., 2013). 
The objective is to maintain a chamber  of constantly slow-drying moisture for which the Petri dish is perfect, as its lid  allows for a minimal circulation of air. . The samples should not normally exceed  a covering over the bottom of the dish. .  as too much overlap of material makes  examination difficult. 
 and a dish packed too full will encourage the passage of  mites from dish to dish and the proliferation of molds. . The substrate in each  dish is completely soaked with water on the first day and approximately 24 h  later. .  after measuring the pH of the water. 
 excess water is pipetted off. .  leaving  the substrate moist. .  but not wet. 
The water used can range from double filtered  or distilled sterile water, to cooled boiled tap water depending on the type of  culture and the objectives of the study. . Some authors correct the pH of distilled  water with KOH or HCl, so that any change in pH is a reflection of the influence  of the substrate used (Everhart et al., 2009; Scarborough et al., 2009). 
The Petri dishes are examined with a stereomicroscope for fruiting bodies  or plasmodia. .  and it is useful to examine each dish before wetting the substrate. .   because occasionally very small myxomycetes brought in from the field. 
 that had  been undetected. .  can be found. 
The frequency of examination depends to a large  degree on the will and time of the investigator. . Many tiny myxomycetes will ap- pear as soon as 24 h after wetting, so it is a good practice to examine the dishes  daily, or at least every 2 days, in the first week with a good dissecting microscope. .  After that, every 2 or 3 days can be enough, depending on the substrate (Wrigley  de Basanta et al., 2009). 
Different observation protocols are used by other inves- tigators, such as the specific days used by Schnittler et al. . (2002) who used 5 ob- servations on days 6, 17, 47, 81, and 109 after the culture was started, or intervals,  such as Snell and Keller (2003) who observed their cultures every 7–10 days. 
The succession of species that appear can sometimes follow a sequence of  first members of the Echinosteliales. .  then members of the Liceales and finally  members of the Trichiales; however. 
 this can be completely different depend- ing on the substrate and on whether the myxomycete was present on or in the  substrate as a spore. .  a microcyst. .  or a sclerotium. 
In addition, there can be two  cycles of a species in one culture but this seems to be very rare. . Frequently, fruit- ing bodies of the same species will appear in the same culture over a variable  incubation period. . For instance. 
 fruiting bodies of Perichaena calongei. .  a recently  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    343 described species on dead leaf bases of the bromeliad species Puya. 
 appeared in  the same moist chamber culture over a period of 16–40 days. .  although the mean  incubation time for the cultures in which the species appeared was 25 days (Lado  et al.. .  2009)   and it was impossible to know if the fruiting bodies were the product  of one or more plasmodia. 
Probably   the species of Echinostelium that appear in  huge numbers. .  and some of the Licea species. 
 are each from individual protoplas- modia. .  but since it is not possible yet to ascertain this. .  most investigators consider  any fruiting bodies of the same species produced in the same culture to be a single  collection (Stephenson. .  1989; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2009)  Once myxomycete fruiting bodies appear, they need to be dried slowly or  sometimes they will be malformed and difficult or impossible to identify. . They  can be carefully removed using very fine forceps. .  insect pin tips (for Echinoste- liales). .  or an implement that we have found particularly useful is a disposable  microscalpel of the type used in eye surgery (e.g.. .  Amo knives by Allergan  Medical Optics). 
The fruiting bodies are transferred to a dry and labeled Pe- tri dish, to complete the drying process for at least 24 more hours. . From here  they can be mounted on cardboard trays and placed in cardboard boxes or even  matchboxes, numbered with a unique specimen number and labeled with all the  collecting data. 
Cultures can be maintained for up to 3 months, after which very  few, if any, myxomycetes will develop. . During this time. 
 it is sometimes neces- sary to add small amounts of water. .  to rehydrate the culture if it is drying out too  quickly. 
 but this should never be to the point of overwatering. .  as the substrate  should always be moist but not wet. . A good guide is to maintain the filter paper  in a moist condition. . Cultures should be placed in normal diffuse daylight. 
 for instance. .  near a  North-facing window in the northern hemisphere. .  but not exposed to direct sun- light. .  in a 12 h light–dark regime. 
 as near as possible. . Room temperature of  approximately 20°C is sufficient. 
Various other microorganisms or even larger  larvae. .  springtails. 
 mites   and many different fungi from pin molds to small  agarics can grow in cultures. .  but they can be discouraged by placing the culture  in a refrigerator or heating with a microscope lamp. 
 but ultimately if overrun. .   the culture must be sealed and autoclaved. . This is what should also be done,  before the disposal of the finished cultures, to prevent any contamination of  the environment. 
Generally, the sooner the substrates are placed in culture the  better the results (Ing, 1999), up to a year or more, but this depends a lot on the  environment from which they come from. . We have obtained good results from  substrates cultured up to 3 years after they were collected. 
One of the microenvironmental conditions, both in the field and in labora- tory culture, that has been most consistently shown to affect myxomycetes, is  the pH. . Smart (1937) observed that the optimum pH for spore germination was  between pH 4.5–7.0, and Gray (1939) noted that a low pH favored the chance  of fruiting in Physarum polycephalum. . Variations in substrate pH. 
 caused by  acidification of the environment by acid deposition. .  industrial pollutants or  even excessive animal excreta will affect the number. 
 variety   and assemblage  344     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology of myxomycetes found. 
 either in the field or in culture (Adamonytė et al.. .  2013;  Everhart et al.. .  2008; Härkönen. 
 1977   1978; Stephenson. .  1989; Wrigley de  Basanta. .  2000   2004)  For example. 
 Härkönen (1978) reported a decrease in  the number and variety of myxomycetes cultured on tree bark from the south  of Finland. .  compared with bark from the north. .  where the bark of the same  tree species was on average less acidic. . In addition, she reported a reduction in  the species variety from an urban air-polluted park compared to a virgin forest  (Härkönen, 1977). . Later, she found that air improvement was related to an in- crease in the myxomycetes recovered (Härkönen and Vänscä, 2004). 
In a study  using simulated acid rain. .  Wrigley de Basanta (2004) found that corticolous  myxomycetes were adversely affected by the constant acidification of tree bark. .   in spite of some buffering by the bark itself. . Both the number and species rich- ness were affected and some species were found to be more toxitolerant than  others. . Wrigley de Basanta’s results suggested the potential of myxomycetes as  bioindicators of the corticolous habitat. 
Molecular sampling done by Clissmann  et al. . (2015) also confirmed that the pH was the main environmental variable  determining myxomycete distribution in their study. 
Under a variety of adverse conditions, such as desiccation, lack of food, or  other unfavorable changes to the microenvironment, the plasmodium can become  a hardened resistant sclerotium. . This occurs frequently in moist chamber cultures  but also in the field. .  and it is a critical life strategy for long-term resistance for the  plasmodial stage of myxomycetes. .  and for incidental dispersal. 
The type of plas- modium dictates how the sclerotium is formed (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969). .  In myxomycetes that produce a phaneroplasmodium, the protoplasm becomes ag- gregated in small spherules or macrocysts inside a horny protective cover. 
Bran- dza (1928) described conditions of their formation. .  and how sclerotium formation  in calcareous myxomycetes could be total or partial. 
 depending on the develop- mental stage of the plasmodium when the conditions became unfavorable. . The  encysted protoplasm survives with less water. 
 and a greater lipid content. .  than a  normal protoplasm (Olive. 
 1975)   but if the desiccation is too fast. .  the sclerotium  is not viable (Brandza. .  1928)  The sclerotia formed by aphanoplasmodia are sepa- rate microscopic droplets formed from the plasmodial veins, and protoplasmodia  encyst entirely into one sclerotium (Martin and Alexopoulos, 1969). 
The encyst- ment can be reversed when conditions become favorable once more, sometimes  after many years. . The sudden appearance of active plasmodia (Gray and Alexo- poulos. .  1968) or fruiting bodies that form within 24 h in moist chamber cultures. .   are most probably explained by the fact that the sclerotia were already formed and  upon rehydration produced plasmodia (Martin and Alexopoulos. .  1969)  Myxo- mycetes can be collected in the field in the form of sclerotia and be transferred  to either agar or moist chamber cultures back in the laboratory and allowed to  complete their development and reveal their identity. . The authors have activated  several species in this manner. 
These methods of isolating myxomycetes by moist  chamber culture are those that have been used by the authors, but there are many  variations used by others that also produce good results. . Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    345 Cold Moist Chamber Cultures A variation on the methods of moist chamber culture has been to attempt to  isolate nivicolous myxomycetes that had not been very successfully cultured  before by the traditional methods. . The very preliminary results of the attempts  are outlined later. 
Since in the field these organisms appear near the edge of  melting snow and require rather specific conditions to sporulate (Lado. .  2004)    an effort to simulate similar conditions in culture was made by the first author. 
 A newly described nivicolous species. .  Lamproderma argenteobruneum. 
 was  cultured in the cold (5°C) and dark (Ronikier et al.. .  2010) instead of the usual  moist chamber culture conditions of around 20°C and in diffuse light. 
Spores  from a 13-year-old field collection were sprinkled onto small pieces of a pte- ridophyte, the substrate of the type collection of the new species. . These pieces  of substrate were placed between two moist filter paper discs in a sterile Petri  dish and incubated at 5°C in the dark. 
After 3 months, six fruiting bodies of the  species were obtained and found to be morphologically the same as the original  collection. . Since then, the method has been repeated various times, but the results  have been limited (Table 10.1). 
Some of the substrates were collected during  a biodiversity survey in regions of Patagonia, Argentina, in November 2009,  where field collections of nivicolous myxomycetes were made. . The substrates  TABLE 10.1 Nivicolous Myxomycetes Obtained in Moist Chamber Cultures Species Substrate Source of  substrate Culture  temperature(s)  (°C) Lamproderma  argenteobruneum Pteridophyte stem The Pyrenees. 
  Spain 5 Lepidoderma sp. . Grass blades The Patagonian  Andes, Argentina 5 Lamproderma sp. . Bark The Patagonian  Andes, Argentina 5 Didymium sp. . Alnus sp  twigs The Alps, France 5 Licea minimaa Nothofagus sp. 
bark Various substrates The Patagonian  Andes, Argentina — 5 20 Trichia sordida Berberis sp. . bark Nothofagus sp. 
 twigs Mendoza Argentina Rio Negro Argentina 5 20 Perichaena  megaspora Litter of an  Asteraceae Mendoza Argentina 20 aNot strictly nivicolous. . 346     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology (bark, twigs, and grasses) were air dried in situ and sealed in paper bags. . They  were put into cold culture within a month of collection. . Other substrates were  removed from exsiccata of nivicolous collections from Europe, kindly pro- vided by Marianne Meyer. 
For some of the cultures. .  the method was varied  slightly to allow the culture dishes to “warm up” to simulate the days of sun- shine. 
 before snowmelt. .  where the temperature beneath the snow cover may be  raised substantially for a short time in the middle of the day (Lado. .  2004)   as  solar radiation passes through the snow. 
During the last month, these cultures  were taken out of the cold during the day, and exposed to external tempera- tures not exceeding 16°C, and then returned to the cold. . Two of these cultures  did produce myxomycetes, suggesting a possible modification of the method  in the future, but it is not known whether they appeared in response to the  warming up or not. . Two other cultures had visible sclerotia at the beginning of  the experiment. . One of these almost immediately produced active plasmodia  that remained active throughout the culture period, but never produced fruiting  bodies. . The cold moist chambers thus far have produced six species of myxo- mycetes that were mature and thus could be identified, at least to genus. 
 In addition. .  several abnormal fruitings. .  plasmodia. .  and sclerotia were pro- duced. 
 giving a total productivity. .  in terms some evidence of myxomycetes. 
  of more than 30% (Wrigley de Basanta. .  unpublished data). 
Another report  of the moist chamber culture of a nivicolous myxomycete was published by  Marx (1998). .  in which fruiting bodies of Trichia sordida were obtained after  nearly 2 months incubating a substrate between 12 and 16°C. . These results  indicate how time-consuming and difficult it is to obtain even a few nivico- lous myxomycetes in moist chamber cultures. .  but the fact that some of them  have shown positive results probably indicates that perfecting this method  of isolation. .  with all the benefits it would bring. 
 is a question of finding the  precise conditions for this group. . Schnittler et al. 
(2015) have made a recent  effort to further characterize the exact ecological conditions for nivicolous  myxomycetes in the field by using data loggers, and Shchepin et al. . (2014)  investigated some of the ecological conditions in agar culture of nivicolous  myxomycetes as discussed later. 
It is to be hoped that these results will en- courage further investigations that will enable this group to be successfully  cultured in the laboratory. . Moist Chambers: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints Moist chamber culture technique has been found to substantially increase the  yield of field collections in all surveys and to give a more complete picture of  the real biodiversity of a particular locality. . It is a method for obtaining relative- ly easy, inexpensive, reproducible, comparative results from different habitats,  substrates, conditions or areas. 
Detection of very small species is especially  difficult in the field and is one of the great advantages of laboratory culture. .   Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    347 because some tiny species of myxomycetes. .  such as those from the genera   Licea. .  Echinostelium. .  or Macbrideola. 
 can be isolated using these techniques. .  In addition, other species can be obtained that may be thought to be rare, since  collecting them in the field is dependent on the serendipity of coinciding with  their optimum phenology of fruiting. . Even new species can be obtained from  moist chamber cultures (Lado et al.. 
 2009; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2013)    although wherever possible characters should be confirmed with field-collected  specimens as well. . In the table of an overview of some of the results from arid and semiarid  surveys in the Neotropics carried out by our team (Table 10.2). 
 moist cham- ber culture collections made up at least 22% of the total collections. . In terms  of the numbers of species, about a quarter of all the species came only from  moist chamber cultures. 
These   of course. .  include the smaller species of Licea. .   Macbrideola. 
 and Echinostelium but are not restricted to them. .  and the cultures  produced many other species. .  and many large well-developed collections. . More  than 10% of the localities sampled in these surveys produced no myxomycetes  in the field, only in culture, and for the Patagonian steppe this number rose to  38%. 
In addition. .  a test of independence on the collections made in a study in  Peru indicated that the proportion of collections from different orders depended  on the method of collection. .  whether from the field or from moist chamber cul- tures (Lado et al.. .  2016)  These data support the belief that the method is useful  in giving a more complete picture of the real biodiversity of any locality. . This  is especially true in arid areas where the hostile environment leaves a paucity  of field collections and substrate material. .  due to the limiting factors of the lack  of water. 
 intense radiation. .  wind and temperature extremes of heat in the day  and cold at night. . New plant substrates can be identified using moist chamber cultures, and  a substantial increase made in the information on the geographic distribu- tion of species and biodiversity. 
It is also possible. .  by means of moist cham- ber cultures. .  to produce collections in excellent condition with closed intact  fruiting bodies. .  when these are often battered or spoiled and weathered in  the field. 
In addition, it is possible to observe some stages of the life cycle  of the myxomycetes directly during these cultures, which would be difficult  or impossible in the field. . For example, the development of the plasmodium  is sometimes an important character for identification, or the time a spe- cies spends as a plasmodium before fruiting. . For instance. 
 in some moist  chamber cultures plasmodia can be observed to go through a cycle of form- ing resistant sclerotia. .  reforming plasmodia then forming sclerotia again. .   and sometimes never forming fruiting bodies. 
In litter samples processed by  Stephenson et al. . (2000), 5%–10% of plasmodia in the moist culture cham- bers did not fruit. . This is possibly due to lack of optimum conditions in a  culture for sporulation. .  but it is also possible that this behavior happens in  the field under frequent or rapidly changing environmental conditions. .  as  discussed earlier. 
348     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology TABLE 10.2 Results From Field (Fc) and Moist Chamber Culture (Mc) Collections in Arid Areas of the Neotropics Study area Tehuacan- Cuicatlan Mexicoa Central Chileb Monte Argentina Patagonian Steppe  Argentina Peru coastal desert References Estrada-Torres et al. 
 (2009) Lado et al. . (2013) Lado et al. . (2011) Lado et al. . (2014) Lado et al. 
(2016) Collections total 1200 633 594 1134 723 Species total 104 110 72 133 78 Field collections 454 491 372 820 500 Moist chamber  collections 746a 142 222 314 223 Species Fc only 38 69 28 73 33 Species Mc only 36a; 35% 24; 22% 19; 26% 36; 27% 20; 26% Species both field  and Mc 31 17 25 24 25 Localities with only  Mc coll. . NA 14/108; 13% 11/105; 11% 63/168; 38% 19/96; 20% aIncludes a special series of 250 Mc of cacti. 
bIncludes other vegetation in nonarid areas. . Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    349 Observations of sclerotia and determining conditions leading to these dor- mant stages are an added possibility with moist chamber cultures and other types  of laboratory cultures. . Cultures can also be used to determine the  morphogenesis  of the fruiting body and to confirm the stability of the phenotypic characters by  comparison of specimens produced in moist chambers with field-collected spec- imens. 
 as they were. .  for example. 
 in the description of Cribraria zonatispora  (Lado et al.. .  1999) or Physarum atacamense (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2012)   A further advantage of collecting myxomycetes in laboratory culture is that it  becomes possible to note incubation times and the substrate pH over the course  of the cultures. . Observations of interactions with other organisms in the cultures  can be made. .  too   such as those noted in the many reports of mites. .  beetles and  fly larvae associated with myxomycete fruiting bodies. 
 plasmodia. .  and spores  (Dudka and Romanenko. .  2006; Stephenson and Stempen. 
 1994)  The system- atic comparison of substrates or environments (Novozhilov et al.. .  2000) can  be another advantage of the technique and in some studies carried out at the  minimum cost of setting up the cultures. .  although in others studies. 
 obtaining  the substrates can be as costly as field collecting. . The constraints of this method of obtaining myxomycetes include the pro- duction of possible variations in morphology as a result of the culture condi- tions or the expression of different assemblages in the cultures done by dif- ferent investigators. .  due to differences in culture protocols and controls. . Not  all species will appear, or form fruiting bodies in a moist chamber culture, as  mentioned earlier, with myxomycetes cycling between the stages as plasmodia  and sclerotia and never fruiting. . Some will not even form plasmodia, as is the  case for various lignicolous species. . We have also found there can be a high  specificity to certain plants or plant groups, as in the case of Licea eremophila. 
 This species developed on Puya spp. . but never in other cultures of a similar  bromeliad genus Hechtia with similar morphology but a different phylogeny  (Wrigley de Basanta et al., 2010). 
The necessity of some very specific biotic or  abiotic element(s) from the substrate plant for successful culture also points to  a possible constraint of the method. . Setting up and observing moist chamber cultures is very time-consuming,  particularly as they have to be examined for a period of months. 
An estimate  was made by Novozhilov et al. . (2000) that it takes 30 min to examine each  9 cm Petri dish culture, but in our experience, it can often take up to 3 times as  long, especially when minute specimens have to be lifted and mounted. . This  obviously limits the number of cultures that can be processed by one person at  any one time. . Species could appear that may not complete their development in  the field, as a result of spores or microcysts present on the substrate developing  under the more constant conditions of the culture. . In addition, as pointed out  by Clark and Haskins (2010a), a bias could be tipped toward the nonheterothal- lic isolates, as they would produce more individuals in the culture. . The loss of  cultures to mold or insect contamination is another constraint, as mentioned  earlier. 
350     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Agar Cultures Cultivation of myxomycetes from spores dates back well over 100 years. . Lister  (1901) cultured B. . utricularis from spores to fruiting bodies. . He did this by germi- nating the spores in water and using scalded slices of the fungus Stereum hirsutum  as a medium for plasmodial growth. . He encouraged sporulation by adding “well- washed thick sticks, with the bark on them” to the Stereum pieces with the plas- modia. 
In the same paper, he explained how he also cultured Didymium comatum  from spores on scalded absorbent paper with boiled cress seeds (Lister, 1901). .  Many of the early reports of culture were on organic substrates to which spores or  plasmodia were added (Martin, 1940), as in the two examples mentioned earlier. .  But Alexopoulos (1969) stressed how essential it was to be able to culture myxo- mycetes with consistent reproducible results and so to be able to compare them  under laboratory conditions to fully understand their taxonomy. . He explained the  significance of experimental work to confirm the stability of characters and to un- derstand the development of different species. 
However   it has become clear that  some species are easier than others to culture. .  and even to the present day only a  small percentage of species have completed their life cycle on agar (Clark. .  1995;  Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta. 
 2008)  As agar culture is a subset of solid media  culture, and agar may not always be the best solidifying agent, others could be  tried. . For instance. 
 gelatin culture could be attempted. .  although this is not always  a good idea due to the fact that many types of bacteria liquify gelatin. 
 but other  material such silica gel could be tried. . A Gelrite medium. 
 used to culture fern  gametophytes. .  has been used with the culture of Echinostelium corynophorum  and abundant sporulation and even growth of the amoeboflagellate phase were  observed (E.F. . Haskins, personal communication). 
The basic protocols of agar culture always begin with the selection of the  material to culture. . An important precaution to take when selecting myxomyce- tes from field collections is to choose fully matured specimens with apparently  well-developed spores. . Once selected, these should be kept from contamination  by transporting them from the field in a separate container from other speci- mens. . We have found that a sterile PCR tube is perfect for this, but small boxes  or paper bags will also suffice. . Samples to be used for culture should not be  fumigated or refrigerated. .  protocols that are often used before field-collected  specimens are placed in a herbarium. 
 but after drying. .  they should be kept at  temperatures as close to field conditions as possible. . When using collections  from moist chamber cultures for agar culture. .  care should be taken also to select  properly matured specimens. 
 free from contaminants. .  such as fungal hyphae. .   and kept separately from the rest of the collections to avoid cross-contamination  with spores from other species. . It is both surprising and disappointing to get to  the end of months of agar culture and subculture and find that a totally different  species has developed because other spores were there as contaminants. . Many researchers have found difficulties germinating or culturing myxo- mycete spores. . Although some species are reported to have germinated after  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    351 32 years (Smith. 
 1929) or even longer (Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968)   different  species have different requirements for germination. .  and are affected by the  treatment they receive before they are put in culture. 
Smith (1929) showed that  variations occurred in spore germination even within the same collection. .  ir- respective of the age of the spores and concluded that the maturity of the spores  at the time of collection was an evident cause. . Alexopoulos (1960) concurred  that many factors that have to do with the spores themselves were responsible  for the differential ability to germinate. .  such as the fruiting bodies from which  they were taken. .  maturity and specific conditions of maturing. 
In addition. .  Clark  and Collins (1976) suggested that differences at the chromosome level or other  variations in DNA could lead to sterile spores through the lack of correct meio- sis and thus cause unexpected low viability of spores from some fruiting bodies. . However, spore germination has been completed for many species. 
Gray  and Alexopoulos (1968) listed 134 species of myxomycetes for which spore  germination has been reported by themselves or other investigators. .  including  some typical small corticolous myxomycetes like Macrideola decapillata and  species of Echinostelium and Licea. 
Germination can be achieved in a variety  of ways, the simplest of which is placing spores in a hanging drop of sterile  distilled or tap water (Smart, 1937). . Smart also used diluted sterilized decoc- tions of the natural substrates of the myxomycetes, to compare the effect of  the solutions on germination. 
He found that the nutrient solutions definitely  promoted germination of the spores. . Alternate freezing and thawing or wetting  and drying have been suggested as influencing the ability of spores to germinate  (Gilbert, 1929). . Osmosis and enzyme action (Gilbert, 1928a) have also been  suggested as mechanisms involved in the actual breakage of the spore wall. 
 Gray and Alexopoulos (1968) gave a most detailed summary of all the early  work done on germination. .  and the conditions of germination and amoebofla- gellate physiology have recently been reviewed by Clark and Haskins (2016). 
The methods we have used are detailed in Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta  (2008), where tips on media preparation, cleaning cultures, and stasis can also  be found. . The method used is to invert a 9 cm Petri dish of sterile 0.75% water  agar and draw a cross with a marker on the base to divide the dish into quarters. .  A small circle is then drawn in each quarter on the bottom of the dish and then,  using aseptic technique, spores are placed with a fine flame-sterilized needle  into each circle. . For very small species like Licea or Echinostelium, this is best  done under a dissecting microscope on a dark background so that the spores can  be seen on the agar surface. . Plates are sealed with parafilm and kept at room  temperature (21–23°C). 
Since germination can take from hours to days. .  depend- ing on the species (Gray and Alexopoulos. .  1968)   the use of the soft water-agar  plates provides moisture to avoid the spores drying before germination. . Usu- ally, bacteria and yeasts, isolated as contaminants of the spores themselves, will  begin to grow among the spores and will form food for the amoeboflagellates  on germination. . It has been suggested that the presence of these food organ- isms stimulates germination in some species. .  although species have been known  352     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology to germinate in distilled water in a shorter time than can be explained by any  bacteria present (Gilbert. .  1928b)  Addition of drops of sterile nutrient solution,  made from 25 g of substrate remains in 1.0 L of water, such as that used in the  culture of P. . atacamense, has been of particular benefit in the germination and  culture of some species. 
However, it is not known whether this may have been  due to stimulation of bacterial growth or to some abiotic factor in the substrate  itself. . The benefit of some element(s) from the substrate plant in the form of the  sterile nutrient medium indicates a particularly close association between the  myxomycete and its substrate plant (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2012)  Germina- tion can be observed closely by inoculating a thin agar block on a culture slide  with spores in the manner described by Spiegel et al. . (2007)  Once many amoeboflagellates (Fig. . 10.2D) are visible, a flame-sterilized  3 mm spatula can be used to cut out a small square of agar supporting the amoe- boflagellates, and this is placed on a clean sterile agar plate. . As the amoebo- flagellate culture grows, subcultures can be made until plasmodium formation  (Fig. 
10.2E) or sporulation (Fig. . 10 2F)  It is best if the subsequent subculture  plates are of slowly increasing nutrient concentration and increasingly drier. .   starting with a very dilute malt/yeast agar (wMY) and increasing to half strength  cornmeal agar (CM/2). . Cultures of some myxomycetes have been found to  thrive with the addition of drops of sterile substrate decoction or a dilute bac- teria (Escherichia coli) or yeast (Cryptococcus laurentii) culture (Haskins and  Wrigley de Basanta. 
 2008)  Viewing plasmodia. .  particularly aphanoplasmodia  and protoplasmodia. .  can be made much easier by using a microscope with dif- ferential interference contrast (DIC). .  such as the Nikon SMZ 1600 shown in  Fig. 
10 2C  Complete in vitro cultivation of myxomycetes has had mixed results and  has not been completed for many species (Clark, 1995; Gray and Alexopou- los, 1968; Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta, 2008). . It has been most success- fully done with larger myxomycetes, notably from the Physarales (Clark and  Collins, 1976). . Clark (1995) listed a total of 98 species that had completed the  life cycle on agar, or other media, and six more were pointed out in the methods  overview by Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta (2008). . In the years since that  publication. 
 at least a further seven species have completed their life cycle on  agar or other media (Phate and Mishra. .  2014; Wrigley de Basanta et al.. 
 2008    2009   2010   2011   2012)  However, most of these methods have involved at  least two-membered cultures, since no attempt has been made to exclude food  organisms from the culture. . In fact   it is probable that the success of the cultures  from spore to spore was because of the growth of natural microorganisms iso- lated at the time of germination. .  and even encouraged to grow by the addition of  sterile substrate extract (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2012)  In a recent paper, Liu  et al. 
(2010) described the spore-to-spore culture of Physarum globuliferum on  cornmeal agar without adding bacteria or other microorganisms. .  but the authors  did not comment on the possible growth of incidental microorganisms usually  carried on the spores themselves nor any method of cleaning the subsequent  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    353 culture of other organisms as discussed in Clark (1995) and Haskins and Wrig- ley de Basanta (2008). . Axenic cultures are clearly the optimum method for comparative studies of  myxomycete development, but they are exceptionally difficult for many species  (Gray and Alexopoulos, 1968; Haskins, 2008). 
Daniel and Rusch (1961) main- tained P. . polycephalum for more than 4 years on a soluble medium without other  organisms. .  and since then many species have been grown in axenic culture. .  but most  investigators have found difficulty in maintaining cultures for long without bacte- ria. . Dead bacteria and fungi have sometimes been successfully used (Cohen. .  1939)  and cleaning cultures that have been started with bacteria. .  especially cleaning plas- modia. 
 are methods that appear in the literature (Balaji et al.. .  1999)  A liquid culture medium was used by Taylor and Mallette (1976) to grow  P. 
gyrosum, with the bacterium E. . coli as a food source. 
However   many liquid  media containing extracts. .  such as serum or liver infusions have been able to  support even large cultures of a few species over long periods of time. .  although  some have consisted only of amoeboflagellates or plasmodia and did not in- volve the complete cycle on these media (Brewer et al.. 
 1964; Goodman. .  1972;  Haskins. .  1970)  An isolation method for using amoeboflagellates. 
 especially for testing re- productive systems. .  is setting up clonal populations. .  either from single spores  or by selecting single amoeboflagellates from germination plates or slants  (Clark. .  1995; Clark and Haskins. 
 2010b   2011)  Some agar cultures of nivico- lous myxomycetes have been reported (Kowalski. .  1971)   many of which in- volved only the germination of spores to produce amoeboflagellates or at most  plasmodia (Schnittler et al.. 
 2015; Shchepin et al.. .  2014; Wikmark et al.. 
 2007)   Methods for culturing myxomycetes are listed on the Internet, especially the  website for those interested in working with P. . polycephalum (http://www. . physarumplus.org), which also gives some useful links to other information. .  The Eumycetozoa website has downloadable handbooks of culture and isola- tion methods (http://slimemold.uark.edu/educationframe.htm). . Agar Cultures: Discussion of Advantages and Constraints When agar cultures of myxomycetes are successful, an enormous amount of  information becomes available. 
With these cultures, it has become possible to  document the entire life cycle of many species. . Apart from increasing the num- ber of collections of a given species. .  the technique can also be used to track  changes in gene expression during life cycles and to determine the stability of  phenotypic characters in the fruiting body. 
 essential information for solving tax- onomic problems (Alexopoulos. .  1969)  Observations of the type of germination  can help to determine or confirm certain groups. . Sometimes   it is possible to dis- cern what kind of amoeboflagellate results from germination or the number of  amoeboflagellates and their size. .  as an indication of the number of postmeiosis  mitotic divisions in the spore (Clark and Haskins. .  2015   2016)  354     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Amoeboflagellates can be observed in cultures and their growth. 
 and  sometimes feeding preferences. .  monitored. 
 and other important metabolic  by- products can be investigated and even mass-produced (Balaji et al.. .  1999;  Brewer et al.. .  1964; Keller and Everhart. 
 2010)  The conditions leading to the  formation and excystment of microcysts can be noted and monitored in this  type of culture. . The presence of mating types, homothallism, or apomyxis can  be determined (Clark, 1995; Clark and Haskins, 2011) and early plasmodia and  their growth patterns observed. . The type of plasmodium formed, especially  when it is tiny and hyaline and thus impossible to view elsewhere, can also be  determined. 
Fruiting body morphogenesis can be observed directly and details  learned as to when lime is deposited and where, and conditions for the forma- tion of resistant sclerotia can be monitored. . Cultures can also provide additional  material from spores, amoeboflagellates, plasmodia, or fruiting bodies for DNA  sequences to construct phylogenies. . Current research using myxomycetes in  mazes or robotics would be impossible without methods of maintaining labora- tory cultures (Adamatzky and Jones, 2008; Dimonte et al., 2014). 
The major constraints to the techniques involved in the use agar or other  types of laboratory culture are the difficulties encountered in determining the  precise requirements of a given species to germinate or grow in artificial cul- ture. . This is very time-consuming and fraught with disappointments and in ad- dition requires some rather more sophisticated and costly laboratory equipment  than moist chamber cultures. 
Since, as mentioned earlier, barely 10% of the  known species have ever been cultured from spore to spore, it appears possible  that some species will simply not grow in the laboratory. . In an exhaustive study  of Didymium squamulosum, from a genus thought to be among those that can  be readily cultured, less than 1% of 94 spore-to-spore cultures were successful  (Winsett, 2011). 
In our own experience, more than 500 agar culture attempts  have resulted in fewer than 10 species with completed life cycles. . Some of  the problems, as mentioned earlier, may be due to unknown culture conditions  but sterility of the strain can occur and possibly does so in nature (Clark and  Haskins, 2010a). . Contamination of the cultures with other protists, bacteria,  and fungi is a major constraint and causes loss of cultures, and time- and cost  inefficiency. . Environmental Sequencing Based on the isolation techniques discussed thus far that depend on the pres- ence of fruiting bodies, many species of myxomycetes have been considered  to be cosmopolitan. 
However   data on their distribution are at best incomplete. .   since forms that do not produce fruiting bodies exist in soils (Stephenson and  Feest. 
 2012)   in fresh water. .  where these organisms were not thought to ex- ist (Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2010)   and even as endocommensals of sea urchins   (Dykova et al.. .  2007)  As such   it seems that they are more abundant and widely  distributed than suggested by inventories based on the recovery and study of the  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    355 fruiting body stage of the life cycle alone (Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2016; Kamono  et al.. .  2013; Stephenson et al.. .  2011)   and other techniques. 
 independent of the  observation of this life stage. .  could be important to better understand the ecol- ogy of these organisms (Ko Ko et al.. .  2009; Stephenson et al.. 
 2011)  Molecular  techniques provide a tool to reveal the hidden diversity of those species that  rarely, or perhaps never, produce fruiting bodies and are therefore absent from  current inventories. . Although detail of these techniques can be found in earlier chapters, they are  also techniques for isolating myxomycetes, and so a brief summary is included  here. . The basic protocols involve extracting, amplifying and sequencing DNA  or RNA from an environmental sample using the polymerase chain reaction  (PCR) method. 
As Stephenson et al. . (2011) pointed out, there have been two  approaches used to date. . The first is massive sequencing of all the RNA or  DNA present in an environmental sample, without the use of specific primers,  by metagenomics techniques. . The second is using specifically designed primers  to detect only certain groups of myxomycetes in the sample. . In both cases the  resulting sequences are compared to bioinformatic databases. . The first method  was used by Urich et al. . (2008) and showed that eumycetozoans were the larg- est group of protists in the soil samples they examined by mass sequencing. .  The second approach is the one most commonly employed at present. 
 using  the partial nuclear small subunit ribosomal RNA gene (SSU rRNA) to ob- tain the DNA of this region (Clissmann et al.. .  2015; Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2016;  Hoppe and Schnittler. .  2015; Kamono and Fukui. 
 2006; Kamono et al.. .  2009a;  Ko Ko et al.. .  2009)   or the RNA product from this gene and using the reverse  transcription method (RT-PCR) to obtain the complementary DNA (Kamono  et al.. .  2009b   2013)  This second method of investigation was used to study soils in the pioneer- ing work carried out by Kamono and Fukui (2006). 
 who separated the DNA  amplicons they obtained by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). .   a technique that enables fragments of DNA of similar size to be separated by  differences in their nucleotide sequences. . The DNA was then reamplified and  the products sequenced. 
The same basic protocols were also used on soil sam- ples by Kamono et al. . (2009a), and by Ko Ko et al. . (2009) to study leaf litter. 
  Kamono et al. . (2009b) modified the procedure to avoid the problems caused by  the presence of introns in the SSU rDNA gene. . They used different combina- tions of primers and varied the PCR cycle temperature to improve the specificity  of product detection in a seminested reverse transcriptase (RT-PCR) approach. .  The products were then separated by DGGE, reamplified, and sequenced. .   Kamono et al. 
(2013) used this procedure to study soils from woodlands and  grasslands at high elevations in three different parts of the world. . Clissmann et al. . (2015) used a different approach to study the bright-spored  myxomycetes in decaying wood. .  cloning the amplified DNA fragments from  the substrate in a plasmid vector and providing a tool for future environmen- tal studies. . In the largest environmental sampling study carried out to date,  356     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology  Fiore-Donno et al. 
(2016) used a similar technique to Clissmann et al. . (2015)  but to study dark-spored myxomycetes. . Hoppe and Schnittler (2015) adapted  a molecular technique called Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymor- phism (TRFLP) to compare whole myxomycete communities based on genom- ic DNA extracted from the soil. 
The studies by Kamono et al. . (2013), Clissmann et al. . (2015), and Fiore-Donno  et al. 
(2016) have demonstrated the presence of a greater diversity of myxomyce- tes than what is reflected by inventories dependant on recovering fruiting bodies. .   although often the sequences they recovered could not be identified to the species  level. . Kamono et al. 
(2013) also observed marked differences between similar  ecological areas that were geographically separated from each other. .  supporting  the idea that many species of myxomycetes are restricted to certain areas and  therefore could be considered to be strictly endemic. 
 as has been suggested in  previous studies (Estrada-Torres et al.. .  2013)  The results from Fiore-Donno et al. 
 (2016) indicated that the dark-spored communities were not only highly diverse  and widely distributed but were not randomly distributed in the soils examined  and showed a dominance of the genera Lamproderma and Didymium. . Environmental Sequencing: Discussion of Advantages and  Constraints Using molecular techniques to carry out environmental sampling has enor- mous potential for revealing the hidden diversity of myxomycetes (Clissmann  et al.. 
 2015; Fiore-Donno et al.. .  2016; Kamono et al.. 
 2013)  This would con- tribute to a greater understanding of the true ecology and distribution of myxo- mycetes and an increase in recording from specific localities and substrates. .   which results in more complete inventories. . The techniques. .  based on sampling  nucleic acids. .  afford the considerable advantage that they can be used for any  stage in the life cycle of the organisms. 
 from spores. .  amoeboflagellates. .  or plas- modia to the resistant stages of microcysts or sclerotia. . In addition. 
 almost any  substrate can be used to sample the DNA. .  not only those used traditionally to  isolate fruiting bodies as discussed earlier. .  but also soil. 
 airborne spores. .  water    or other organisms. .  where other methods have had little success. 
Another ad- vantage of environmental sampling is that it provides a method of generating  comparable data on the relative abundance and assemblages of myxomycetes in  different areas. .  and the samples can be collected in any season. 
The techniques  can be used to great advantage in conjunction with traditional field and culture  isolation (Wrigley de Basanta et al.. .  2015) to confirm the presence of certain  species that may produce irregular fruitings or none at all. 
The greatest disadvantage of this type of environmental sampling is that  only a fraction of known species have been sequenced thus far. .  and so the ma- jority of sequences obtained do not coincide with those in the databases. 
It is  therefore very important to continue to incorporate sequences of more species,  but these should be backed by careful taxonomic study. . It has become evident  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    357 that many morphospecies are actually complexes of genetically distinct units  (Aguilar et al.. 
 2014; Feng et al.. .  2016; Fiore-Donno et al.. 
 2011)   so it is even  possible that incorrect names are ascribed to sequences deposited in the data- bases. . In addition, some amoeboflagellates may no longer be able to sporulate  and have become soil amoebae causing even greater taxonomic problems, as  pointed out by Clark and Haskins (2016). . Another problem to consider with environmental sampling of nucleic acids  is that the technique does not distinguish the active phases of the life cycle. .   such as amoeboflagellates or plasmodia. 
 from the resting stages. .  such as spores. .   microcysts. .  or sclerotia. 
 so results from dormant. .  or even dead. .  myxomycetes  could be contributing to the total diversity being revealed (Kamono et al.. .  2013)   In addition. 
 none of the advances used in characterization of myxomycete as- semblages by environmental sampling using molecular techniques have con- sidered all groups of myxomycetes and there is a distinct bias in such studies  toward the dark-spored genera. . CONCLUSIONS The myxomycetes have interested scientists and other collectors for several  centuries. 
 and these organisms have been recorded and or isolated from every  terrestrial ecosystem and recovered from every plant type and vegetation type  investigated. . As an essential and major component of biotic communities in  every biome, their isolation and study is of evident importance. . They can be  recovered directly from the environment in which they develop, or be encour- aged to develop under a variety of contrived but controlled conditions in the  laboratory. 
In this chapter, an effort has been made to summarize the techniques  and recording protocols currently in use, and to indicate some of the advantages  and constraints of each. . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Edward Haskins, Carlos Lado, Alba Mónica Montiel, and Christine Priestley for  valuable suggestions and comments. . Some of the research was supported by the Spanish  Government grant CGL2014-52584P. . REFERENCES Adamatzky, A., Jones, J., 2008. 
Towards Physarum robots: computing and manipulating on water  surface. . J  Bionic Eng. . 5, 348–357. .  Adamonytė, G., Reda Iršėnaitė, R., Motieju¯naitė, J., Taraškevicˇius, R., Matulevicˇiu¯tė, D., 2013. 
 Myxomycetes in a forest affected by great cormorant colony: a case study in Western Lithuania. .  Fungal Divers. 
59, 131–146. .  Aguilar, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Lado, C., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2014. 
Using environmental niche  models to test the “everything is everywhere” hypothesis for Badhamia. . ISME J  8, 737–745. .  Alexopoulos, C.J., 1960. 
Morphology and laboratory cultivation of Echinostelium minutum. . Am   J  Bot  47, 37–43   358     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The experimental approach to the taxonomy of the myxomycetes. 
Myco- logia 61, 219–239. .  Balaji, S., Sujatha, A., Kalyanasundaram, I., 1999. 
A simple rapid procedure for obtaining axenic  cultures of myxomycete plasmodia. . Can  J  Microbiol  45, 865–870. .  Brandza, M., 1928. 
Observations sur quelques sclérotes de Myxomycètes Calcarées. . Le Botaniste  iv–v, 117–146. .  Brewer, E.N., Kuraishi, S., Garver, J.C., Strong, F.M., 1964. 
Mass culture of a slime mold, Physa- rum polycephalum. . Appl  Microbiol  12, 161–164. .  Clarholm, M., 1981. 
Protozoan grazing of bacteria in soil-impact and importance. . Microb  Ecol   7, 343–350. .  Clark, J., 1995. 
Myxomycete reproductive systems: additional information. . Mycologia 87, 779–786. .  Clark, J., Collins, O.R., 1976. . Studies on the mating systems of eleven species of myxomycetes. 
 Am  J  Bot  63, 783–789. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2010a. 
Reproductive systems in the myxomycetes: a review. . Mycosphere  1, 337–353. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2010b. 
Culture and reproductive systems of 11 species of Mycetozoans. .  Mycologia 96, 36–40. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2011. 
Principles and protocols for genetical study of myxomycete repro- ductive systems and plasmodial coalescence. . Mycosphere 2, 487–496. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2015. 
Myxomycete plasmodial biology: a review. . Mycosphere 6, 643–658. .  Clark, J., Haskins, E.F., 2016. . Mycosphere essays 3. 
Myxomycete spore and amoeboflagellate biol- ogy: a review. . Mycosphere 7, 86–101. .  Clissmann, F., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Hoppe, B., Krüger, D., Kahl, T., Unterseher, M., Schnittler, M.,  2015. 
First insight into dead wood protistan diversity: a molecular sampling of bright-spored myxo- mycetes (Amoebozoa, slime-moulds) in decaying beech logs. . FEMS Microbiol. . Ecol  91, 1–8   Cohen, A.L., 1939. 
Nutrition of the myxomycetes. . I  Pure culture and two-membered culture of  myxomycete plasmodia. 
Bot  Gaz  101, 243–274. .  Daniel, J.W., Rusch, H.P., 1961. 
The pure culture of Physarum polycephalum on a partially defined  soluble medium. . J  Gen  Microbiol  25, 47–59   Dimonte, A., Cifarelli, A., Berzina, T., Chiesi, V., Ferro, P., Besagni, T., Albertini, F., Adamatz- ky, A., Erokhin, V., 2014. . Magnetic nanoparticles-loaded Physarum polycephalum: directed  growth and particles distribution. 
Interdiscip. . Sci  Comput  Life Sci  6, 1–9   Dudka, I.O., Romanenko, K.O., 2006. 
Co-existence and interaction between myxomycetes and  other organisms in shared niches. . Acta Mycol. . 41, 99–112. .  Dykova, I., Lom, J., Dvorˇáková, H., Pecková, H., Fiala, I., 2007. 
Didymium-like myxogastrids (class  Mycetozoa) as endocommensals of sea urchins (Sphaerechinus granularis). . Folia Parasitol. .  54, 1–12   Eliasson, U., 1981. 
Patterns of occurrence of myxomycetes in a spruce forest in south Sweden. .  Holarct  Ecol  4, 20–31   Eliasson, U., 2013. 
Coprophilous myxomycetes: recent advances and future research directions. .  Fungal Divers. . 59, 85–90   Eliasson, U., Lundquist, N., 1979. . Fimicolous myxomycetes. 
Bot  Not  132, 551–568. .  Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Conde, E., Lado, C., 2009. 
Myxomycetes associated  with dryland ecosystems of the Tehuacán-Cuicatlán Valley Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. . Fungal  Divers. . 36, 17–56   Estrada-Torres, A., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., 2013. 
Biogeographic patterns of the myxo- mycete biota of the Americas using a parsimony analysis of endemicity. . Fungal Divers. . 59,  159–177. 
 Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    359 Everhart, S.E., Ely, J.S., Keller, H.W., 2009. . Evaluation of tree canopy epiphytes and bark character- istics associated with the presence of corticolous myxomycetes. 
Botany 87, 509–517. .  Everhart, S.E., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2008. 
Influence of bark pH on the occurrence and distribution  of tree canopy myxomycete species. . Mycologia 100, 191–204. .  Feest, A., 1987. 
The quantitative ecology of soil Mycetozoa. . Prog  Protistol  2, 331–361. .  Feest, A., Madelin, M.F., 1985a. 
A method for the enumeration of myxomycetes in soils and its ap- plication to a wide range of soils. . FEMS Microbiol. . Ecol  31, 103–109. .  Feng, Y., Klahr, A., Janik, P., Ronikier, A., Hoppe, T., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2016. 
 What an intron may tell: several sexual biospecies coexist in Meriderma spp. . (myxomyce- tes). . Protist 167, 234–253. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Kamono, A., Chao, E.E., Fukui, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., 2010. 
Invalidation of  Hyperamoeba by transferring its species to other genera of Myxogastria. . J  Eukaryot  Micro- biol. 
57, 189–196. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Meyer, M., Schnittler, M., 2011. . Genetic structure of two  protist species (Myxogastria, Amoebozoa) suggests asexual reproduction in sexual amoebae. 
 PLoS One 6, e22872. .  Fiore-Donno, A.M., Weinert, J., Wubet, T., Bonkowski, M., 2016. . Metacommunity analysis of  amoeboid protists in grassland soils. 
Sci  Rep  6, 19068   Gilbert, F.A., 1928a. . Factors influencing the germination of myxomycetous spores. 
Am  J  Bot  16,  280–286. .  Gilbert, F.A., 1928b. . A study of the method of spore germination in myxomycetes. 
Am  J  Bot  15,  345–352. .  Gilbert, F.A., 1929. . Spore germination in the myxomycetes: a comparative study of spore germina- tion by Families. 
Am  J  Bot  16, 421–432. .  Gilbert, H.C., Martin, G.W., 1933. 
Myxomycetes found on the bark of living trees. . Univ  Iowa Stud   Nat  Hist  15, 3–8   Goodman, E.M., 1972. . Axenic culture of myxamoebae of the myxomycete Physarum polyceph- alum. . J  Bacteriol  III, 242–247. .  Gray, W.D., 1939. 
The relation of pH and temperature to the fruiting of Physarum polycephalum. .  Am  J  Bot  26, 709–714. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . The Biology of the Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press, New York, NY. .  Härkönen, M., 1977. . Corticolous myxomycetes in three different habitats in southern Finland. 
 Karstenia 17, 19–32. .  Härkönen, M., 1978. 
On corticolous myxomycetes in Northern Finland and Norway. . Annal  Bot   Fenn  15, 32–37   Härkönen, M., Vänscä, H., 2004. 
Corticolous myxomycetes and Lichens in the Botanical Garden in  Helsinki, Finland. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 183–187. .  Haskins, E.F., 1970. . Axenic culture of myxamoebae of the myxomycete Echinostelium minutum. 
 Can  J  Bot  48, 663–664. .  Haskins, E.F., 2008. 
Useful methods for bringing field collections of myxomycetes into agar cul- ture. . Available from: http://slimemold.uark.edu/educationframe.htm Haskins, E.F., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. . Methods of agar culture of myxomycetes: an overview. 
 Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 1–7   Hoppe, T., Schnittler, M., 2015. . Characterization of myxomycetes in two different soils by  TRFLP—analysis of partial 18S rRNA gene sequences. . Mycosphere 6, 216–227. .  Ing, B., 1983. 
A ravine association of myxomycetes. . J  Biogeogr  10, 299–306. .  Ing, B., 1994. 
The phytosociology of myxomycetes. . New Phytol. 
126, 175–201. .  Ing, B., 1999. 
The Myxomycetes of Britain and Ireland. . Richmond Publishing Co., Slough. 
 360     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Kamono, A., Fukui, F., 2006. . Rapid PCR-based method for detection and differentiation of   Didymiaceae and Physaraceae (myxomycetes) in environmental samples. . J  Microbiol  Meth- ods 67, 496–506. .  Kamono, A., Kojima, H., Matsumoto, J., Kawamura, K., Fukui, M., 2009a. 
Airborne myxomycete  spores: detection using molecular techniques. . Naturwissenschaften 96, 147–151. .  Kamono, A., Matsumoto, J., Kojima, H., Fukui, M., 2009b. 
Characterization of myxomycete com- munities in soil by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based method. .  Soil Biol. 
Biochem  41, 1324–1330. .  Kamono, A., Meyer, M., Cavalier-Smith, T., Fukui, M., Fiore-Donno, A.M., 2013. 
Exploring slime  mould diversity in high-altitude forests and grasslands by environmental RNA analysis. . FEMS  Microbiol. 
Ecol  84, 98–109. .  Keller, H.W., 2004. 
Tree canopy biodiversity: student research experiences in Great Smoky Moun- tains National Park. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 47–65. .  Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., 2010. 
The importance of myxomycetes in biological research and  teaching. . Fungi 3, 13–27. .  Kilgore, C.M., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2009. 
Aerial reproductive structures of vascular plants as a  microhabitat for myxomycetes. . Mycologia 101, 303–319. .  Ko Ko, T.W., Stephenson, S.L., Jeewon, R., Lumyong, S., Hyde, K.D., 2009. 
Molecular diversity of  myxomycetes associated with decaying wood and forest floor leaf litter. . Mycologia 101, 592–598. .  Kosheleva, A.P., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity of the state reserve  “Stolby” (south-eastern Siberia, Russia). . Fungal Divers. 
31, 45–62   Kowalski, D.T., 1971. . The genus Lepidoderma. . Mycologia 63, 491–516. .  Lado, C., 1993. . Myxomycetes of Mediterranean woodlands. 
In: Pegler, D.N., Boddy, L., Ing, B.,  Kirk, P.M. . (Eds.), Fungi of Europe: Investigation, Recording and Conservation. . Royal Botanic  Gardens, Kew, pp. . 93–114   Lado, C., 2004. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes of the Iberian Peninsula: considerations on species rich- ness and ecological requirements. . Syst  Geogr  Plants 74, 143–157. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D. 
Typification of the myxomycete taxa described by the Listers and  preserved at the Natural History Museum, London (BM), (in press). . Lado, C., Mosquera, J., Beltrán Tejera, E., 1999. 
Cribraria zonatispora, development of a new  myxomycete with unique spores. . Mycologia 91, 157–165. .  Lado, C., Ronikier, A., Ronikier, M., Drozdowicz, A., 2005. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes from the  Sierra de Gredos. . Nova Hedwigia 81, 371–394. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., 2011. 
biodiversity of myxomycetes from the  Monte Desert of Argentina. . Anales del Jardin Botanico de Madrid 68 (1), 61–95. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., García-Carvajal, E., 2014. . Myxomycete di- versity of the Patagonian Steppe and bordering areas in Argentina. 
Anales Jard. . Bot  Madrid  71 (e006), 1–35. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., García-Carvajal, E., Aguilar, M., Hernández,  J.C., 2009. . Description of a new species of Perichaena (myxomycetes) from arid areas of Ar- gentina. 
Anales Jard. . Bot  66 (S1), 63–70. .  Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
The biodiversity of  myxomycetes in central Chile. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 3–32   Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. . Myxomycete di- versity in the coastal desert of Peru with emphasis on the lomas formations. 
Anales Jard. . Bot   Madrid 73 (e032), 1–27. .  Lister, A., 1894. . A Monograph of the Mycetozoa: Being a Descriptive Catalogue of Species in the  Herbarium of the British Museum. . Longman & Co., London. 
 Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    361 Lister, A., 1901. . On the cultivation of Mycetozoa from spores. . J  Bot  39, 5–8   Lister, G., 1918. 
The Mycetozoa: a short history of their study in Britain; an account of their habitats  generally; and a list of species recorded from Essex. . Essex Naturalist [Essex field club special  memoirs]. . Mycetozoa 6, 1–54. .  Liu, P., Wang, Q., Li, Y., 2010. 
Spore-to-spore agar culture of the myxomycete Physarum globu- liferum. . Arch  Microbiol  192, 97–101. 
 Martin, G.W., 1940. . The myxomycetes. 
Bot  Rev  6, 356–388. .  Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Marx, H., 1998. 
Trichia sordida in Feuchtkammer—ein deutscher Erstnachweis—und andere   seltene Myxomyceten aus Thüringen. . Boletus 22, 107–111. .  Mitchell, D.W., 1980. 
A Key to the Corticolous Myxomycetes. . British Mycological Society,   Cambridge. .  Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., Zemlianskaia, I.V., Fefelov, K.A., 2000. 
Biodiversity of plasmo- dial slime moulds (Myxogastria): measurement and interpretation. . Protistology 1, 161–178. 
 Olive, L.S., 1975. . The Mycetozoans. 
Academic Press, London. .  Panckow T., 1654. . Herbarium Portatile. . Berlin  Phate, P., Mishra, R.L., 2014. 
Culture of Hemitrichia serpula on wide range of agar medium. . Int   J  Curr  Microbiol  Appl  Sci  3, 480–488. .  Poulain, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. 
Les Myxomycètes. . Fédération Mycologique et Bota- nique Dauphiné-Savoie, Sevrier. 
 Rodríguez-Palma, M.M., 2003. . Estudio monográfico de los Myxomycetes del estado de Tlaxcala. .  Tesis de doctorado, Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM. 
Rollins, A.W., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. . Myxomycetes associated with grasslands of the western  central United States. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 147–158. .  Ronikier, A., Lado, C., 2015. 
Nivicolous stemonitales from the Austral Andes: analysis of mor- phological variability. .  distribution and phenology as a first step toward testing the large-scale  coherence of species and biogeographical properties. 
Mycologia 107, 258–283. .  Ronikier, A., Lado, C., Meyer, M., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2010. 
Two new species of nivicolous  Lamproderma (myxomycetes) from the mountains of Europe and America. . Mycologia 102,  718–728. .  Ronikier, A., Ronikier, M., 2009. 
How ‘alpine’ are nivicolous myxomycetes? A worldwide assess- ment of altitudinal distribution. . Mycologia 101, 1–16. .  Rossman, A.Y., Tulloss, R.E., O’Dell, T.E., Thorn, R.G., 1998. 
Protocols for an All Taxa Biodiver- sity Inventory of Fungi in a Costa Rican Conservation Area. . Parkway, Boone, NC. .  Scarborough, A.R., Keller, H.W., Ely, J.S., 2009. . Species assemblages of tree canopy myxomycetes  related to bark pH. 
Castanea 74, 93–104. .  Schnittler, M., Erastova, D.A., Shchepin, O.N., Heinricha, E., Novozhilov, Y.K., 2015. 
Four years  in the Caucasus: observations on the ecology of nivicolous myxomycetes. . Fungal Ecol. 
14,  105–115. .  Schnittler, M., Lado, C., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Rapid biodiversity assessment of a tropical  myxomycete assemblage—Maquipucuna Cloud Forest Reserve, Ecuador. . Fungal Divers. 
9,   135–167. .  Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, Y.K., Carvajal, E., Spiegel, F.W., 2013. 
Myxomycete diversity in the  Tarim basin and eastern Tian-Shan, Xinjiang Province, China. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 91–108. .  Schnittler, M., Stephenson, S.L., 2002. 
Inflorescences as a new microhabitat for myxomycetes. .  Mycologia 94, 6–20. .  Shchepin, O., Novozhilov, Y., Schnittler, M., 2014. 
Nivicolous myxomycetes in agar culture: some  results and open problems. . Protistology 8, 53–61. .  362     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Smart, R.F., 1937. . Influence of certain external factors on spore germination in the myxomycetes. 
 Am  J  Bot  24, 145–159. .  Smith, E.C., 1929. 
The longevity of myxomycete spores. . Mycologia 21, 321–323. .  Snell, K.L., Keller, H.W., 2003. 
Vertical distribution and assemblages of corticolous myxomycetes  on five tree species in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. . Mycologia 95, 565–576. .  Spiegel, F.W., Haskins, E.F., Cavender, J.C., Landolt, J.C., Lindley-Settlemyre, L.A., Edwards,  S.M., Nderitu, G., Shadwick, J.D., 2007. 
A beginner’s guide to isolating and culturing eumyce- tozoans. . Available from: http://slimemold.uark.edu/educationframe.htm Stephenson, S.L., 1988. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests I. . Patterns of  occurrence in the upland forests of south-western Virginia. 
Can  J  Bot  66, 2187–2207. .  Stephenson, S.L., 1989. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests II. . Patterns  of occurrence on bark surface of living trees, leaf litter, and dung. 
Mycologia 81, 608–621. .  Stephenson, S.L., Feest, A., 2012. 
Ecology of soil eumycetozoans. . Acta Protozool. . 51, 201–208. .  Stephenson, S.L., Fiore-Donno, A.M., Schnittler, M., 2011. 
Myxomycetes in soil. . Soil Biol    Biochem  43, 2237–2242. .  Stephenson, S.L., Kalyanasundaram, I., Lakhanpal, T.N., 1993. 
A comparative biogeographical  study of myxomycetes in the mid-Appalachians of eastern North America and two regions of  India. . J  Biogeogr  20, 645–657. .  Stephenson, S.L., Laursen, G.A., Seppelt, R.D., 2007. . Myxomycetes of subantarctic Macquarie  Island. 
Aust  J  Bot  55, 439–449. .  Stephenson, S.L., Novozhilov, Y.K., Schnittler, M., 2000. 
Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes  in high-latitude regions of the northern hemisphere. . J  Biogeogr 27, 741–754. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press,  Portland, OR. .  Stephenson, S.L., Urban, L.A., Rojas, R., McDonald, M.S., 2008. . Myxomycetes associated with  woody twigs. . Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 21–28   Taylor, R.L., Mallette, M.F., 1976. 
Growth of Physarum gyrosum on agar plates and in liquid   culture. . Antimicrob. . Agents Chemother. 
10 (4), 613–617. .  Ukkola, T., Härkönen, M., Saarimáki, T., 1996. . Tanzanian myxomycetes: second survey. 
Karstenia  36, 51–77. .  Urich, T., Lanzén, A., Qi, J., Huson, D.H., Schleper, C., Schuster, S.C., 2008. 
Simultaneous   assessment of soil microbial community structure and function through analysis of the meta- transcriptome. . PLoS One 3, e2527. .  Wikmark, O.G., Huagen, P., Lundblad, E.W., Haugli, K., Johansen, S.D., 2007. 
The molecular evo- lution and structural organization of group I introns at position 1389 in nuclear small subunit  rDNA of myxomycetes. . J Eukaryot. . Microbiol  54, 49–56   Winsett, K.E., 2011. . Intraspecific variation in response to spore-to-spore cultivation in the myxomy- cete, Didymium squamulosum. 
Mycosphere 2, 555–564. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2000. . Acid deposition in Madrid and corticolous myxomycetes. 
Stapfia 73  (155), 113–120. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2004. 
The effect of simulated acid rain on corticolous myxomycetes. . Syst   Geogr  Plants 74, 175–181. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., 2010. 
Licea eremophila, a new myxomycete  from arid areas of South America. . Mycologia 102, 1185–1192. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., 2011. 
Spore to spore culture of Didymium  operculatum, a new myxomycete from the Atacama Desert of Chile. . Mycologia 103, 895–903. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., 2012. 
Description and life cycle of a new  Physarum (myxomycetes) from the Atacama Desert in Chile. . Mycologia 104, 1206–1212. .  Techniques for Recording and Isolating Myxomycetes  Chapter | 10    363 Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2009. . Description and life  cycle of a new Didymium (myxomycetes) from arid areas of Argentina and Chile. . Mycologia  101, 707–716. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Stephenson, S.L., 2013. 
Biodiversity studies  of myxomycetes in Madagascar. . Fungal Divers. 
59, 55–83   Wrigley de Basanta, D., Lado, C., García-Martín, J.M., Estrada-Torres, A., 2015. . Didymium   xerophilum, a new myxomycete from the tropical Andes. . Mycologia 107, 157–168. .  Wrigley de Basanta, D., Stephenson, S.L., Lado, C., Estrada-Torres, A., Nieves-Rivera, A.M., 2008. 
 Lianas as a microhabitat for myxomycetes in tropical forest. . Fungal Divers. 
28, 109–125. .  FURTHER READING Feest, A., Madelin, M.F., 1985b. 
Numerical abundance of myxomycetes (Myxogastrids) in soils in  the West of England. . FEMS Microbiol. 
Ecol  1, 353–360. .  Keller, H.W., Skrabal, M., Eliasson, U.H., Gaither, T.W., 2004. 
Tree canopy biodiversity in the  Great Smoky Mountains National Park: ecological and developmental observations of a new  myxomycete species of Diachea. . Mycologia 96, 537–547. .  Rojas, C., Stephenson, S.L., Valverde, R., Estrada-Torres, A., 2012. 
A biogeographical valuation of  high-elevation myxomycete assemblages in the northern Neotropics. . Fungal Ecol. . 5, 99–113   Page left intentionally blank 365 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00011-1 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. . Chapter 11 Uses and Potential: Summary of  the Biomedical and Engineering  Applications of Myxomycetes in  the 21st Century Hanh T.M. 
Tran*   Andrew Adamatzky** *Ho Chi Minh International University. .  Ho Chi Minh City. .  Vietnam; **The Unconventional  Computing Centre. .  University of the West of England. 
 Bristol   United Kingdom PART A: BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS FROM MYXOMYCETES Hanh T.M. . Tran Bioactive compounds from myxomycetes were intensively studied during the  period from the 1950s to the 1970s. 
 but then such studies were largely discontin- ued until the early part of the 21st century. . The biggest challenge in determining  the nature of the bioactive compounds derived from myxomycetes has been the  availability of samples to process. 
The number of fruiting bodies of a particular  species appearing in the field is usually relatively limited except for a few spe- cies (e.g.. .  Fuligo septica and Lycogala epidendrum) that achieve considerable  size. 
 and the plasmodia of most species of myxomycete are difficult to culture. .  A number of bioactive compounds, including those with antimicrobial and anti- cancer properties, have been isolated from the fruiting bodies and plasmodia of  myxomycetes (Dembitsky et al., 2005). 
However, only a small number of these  have been tested to evaluate their usefulness to humans. . In addition to their  antimicrobial and anticancer activities. 
 3  4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA). .   a neurotransmitter precursor used in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. .  has  been recorded from Stemonitis herbatica. 
The potential for commercialization  of this compound has been suggested by Loganathan (1998). . Among the myxomycetes, the plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum is  particularly interesting because of its fast growth rate, high biomass produc- tion, and ease of culturing. . Therefore, it has been used as the model organism in  366     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology numerous studies in several different fields. 
In terms of industrial applications,  Brewer et al. . (1964) successfully grew some strains of this species at a pilot  scale for biomass production. 
This type of success, combined with the fact that  the plasmodium has no cell walls, inspired Tran et al. . (2012) to investigate the  feasibility of using plasmodia as a source of lipids for biodiesel production. .  Their initial study suggested that myxomycetes can be used as a new source of  lipids for biodiesel production. .  and the feasibility of direct conversion of the  plasmodium into biodiesel was demonstrated to be possible. 
In brief   the purpose of the first part of this chapter is to summarize sig- nificant achievements in research into myxomycete bioactive compounds and  initial results in other fields using these organisms. . In addition, some potential  research applications that could be carried out with myxomycetes are discussed. . MYXOMYCETE ANTIMICROBIAL COMPOUNDS Antimicrobial compounds have been isolated from both fruiting bodies and  plasmodia of various species of myxomycetes. 
In general. .  most bioactive com- pounds from myxomycetes have been shown to display their strongest inhibi- tion effects on Gram-positive bacteria (e.g.. .  Bacillus subtilis). .  followed by fungi  (e.g.. .  Candida albicans). 
 but with low or no inhibition effects on Gram-negative  bacteria (Sawada et al.. .  2000)  However, the interactions that take place be- tween the bioactive compounds and the microbial cells have not yet been stud- ied. 
Some selected compounds that have been isolated from myxomycetes are  summarized in Table 11.1. . As mentioned by Considine and Mallette (1965), early research directed  toward the antimicrobial compounds of myxomycetes was carried out using  F. 
septica, as reported by Locquin and Prevot (1948). . Two pigmented antibi- otic materials thought to be anthraquinoic acids were extracted from F. . septica   These authors also mentioned the research of Sobels (1950), who reported that  the slimy substances produced by the plasmodia of myxomycetes inhibited the  growth of certain bacteria and yeasts. . In similar research carried out by Asgari  and Henney (1977). 
 the slimy substances obtained from of the plasmodium of  Physarum flavicomum were found to be composed mostly of glucoprotein and  exhibited inhibition effects against B. . subtilis by degrading the cell wall of the  latter. . However, this bacterium was soon recovered from this inhibition. 
Several studies have been carried out on Physarum gyrosum (Considine  and Mallette, 1965; Mayberry et al., 1962; Schroeder and Mallette, 1973; Tay- lor and Mallette, 1976). . Fergus and Mallette (1962) found that extracts from  P. 
gyrosum display inhibitory activity against the bacteria Staphylococcus au- reus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. . Considine and Mallette (1965) then found  that diffusible materials from a culture of P. . gyrosum could inhibit the growth  of B. . subtilis, Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli, S. . aureus, and P. 
aerugino- sa; these compounds were partially purified. . Schroeder and Mallette (1973)   succeeded in purifying the antibiotic compound obtained from the culture of  Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    367 TABLE 11.1 Myxomycete Antimicrobial Compounds Species Sample source Compounds Pathogens tested References Cribraria purpurea Fruiting body Cribrarione A Bacillus subtilis Naoe et al. 
(2003) Didymium bahiense Plasmodium Bahiensol B. . subtilis Misono et al. 
(2003a) Enteridium lycoperdon Fruiting body Enteridinine A Enteridinine B B. . subtilis, Escherichia coli, Candida  albicans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,  Staphylococcus aureus Rˇezanka et al. 
(2004) Lycogala epidendrum Fruiting body Lycogalinoside A Lycogalinoside B B. . subtilis, E. . coli, C  albicans, S. . cerevi- siae, S. 
aureus Rˇezanka and  Dvorˇáková (2003) Physarum melleum Plasmodium Crude extract B. . subtilis Nakatani et al. . (2005b) Physarella oblonga Plasmodium Stigmasterol and  fatty acids B. 
subtilis, Botrytis cinerea, E. . coli, Fu- sarium oxysporum, S. . aureus, Rhizoctonia  solani, Trypanosoma cruzi Herrera et al. . (2011) P  melleum Undetermined Unidentified species Undetermined 368     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology this myxomycete. 
The results they obtained showed that the antibiotic involved  was different from other common antibiotics, such as pyromicin-anthracycline  and tetracyclines. . Subsequent research found that this myxomycete produced  the same antibiotic materials when grown in a liquid medium as it did when  grown on agar plates (Taylor and Mallette. 
 1976)   and the antibiotic material  could inhibit the growth of B. . cereus  However, the chemical structure of the  antibiotic was not reported. . More recently, two novel polypropionate lactone glycosides, which were  given the names lycogalinosides A and B, were isolated from fruiting bod- ies of L. . epidendrum. 
Lycogalinoside A showed significant inhibitory activ- ity against the growth of S. . aureus and B. . subtilis, with a minimal inhibitory  concentration (MIC) of 52 and 12 mg/mL, respectively. . Lycogalinoside B  showed a weaker activity but higher antifungal activity than lycogalinoside A. 
 The structures of these two compounds were determined by using spectral data  combined with their degradation products. . The results obtained revealed that  the chemical structure of the two compounds is similar to those usually pro- duced by  Streptomyces. . Therefore   there is at least a chance that some species  of  Streptomyces. .  which had been consumed by this myxomycete at an early  stage of the life cycle (probably the amoeboflagellate stage). 
 actually produced  these compounds (Rˇ ezanka and Dvorˇáková. .  2003)  In a similar study, two novel  deoxysugar esters (enteridinines A and B) were isolated from fruiting bodies  of Enteridium lycoperdon. . Enteridinine A was found to significantly inhibit  growth of Gram-positive bacteria (S. 
aureus and B. . subtilis), along with dem- onstrating a mild growth inhibition of Gram-negative bacteria and some yeasts  (C. . albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae). . On the other hand, enteridinine B  showed a higher antifungal activity but a weak antibacterial activity (Rˇ ezanka  et al., 2004). 
Early studies of L. . epidendrum identified three novel dimethyl  pyrrole dicarboxylates, which were given the names lycogarubins A–C, from  fruiting bodies of this myxomycete. . These compounds were closely related to  arcyriarubins and arycyriaflavins isolated from the fruiting bodies of Arcyria  denudata. . Lycogarubin C showed anti-HSV-I virus activity (IC50 of 17.2 µg/ mL) in vitro (Hashimoto et al., 1994). . In another study carried out by Rˇ ezanka et al. 
(2004), a fulicineroside, gly- cosidic dibenzofuran metabolite, was isolated from the fruiting bodies of Fuligo  cinerea. . The compound also displayed antimicrobial activities similar to those  of enteridinines A and B isolated from E. . lycoperdon. . Remarkably. 
 the com- pound displayed significant inhibition of the growth (about 83%) of crown gall  tumors on potato disks inoculated with Agrobacterium tumefaciens carrying a  tumor-inducing plasmid (Rˇ ezanka et al.. .  2005)  In addition to those myxomycetes that form large fruiting bodies, some  other species (e.g., Cribraria purpurea) with small fruiting bodies have also  been investigated. . A new dihydrofuranonaphthoquinone pigment (Cribrarione  A) isolated from the fruiting bodies of C. . purpurea was found to possess anti- microbial activity against B. 
subtilis (Naoe et al., 2003). . In one of the relatively  Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    369 rare studies that have used plasmodia as the source of the samples that were in- vestigated, Misono et al. 
(2003a) successfully isolated and structurally charac- terized a new antimicrobial glycerolipid (bahiensol) from a plasmodial culture  of Didymium bahiense. . It should be noted that plasmodia used for studies of bioactive compounds  in myxomycetes are derived mostly from members of the Physarales due to  the fact that they are easily cultured and many species normally form quite  large plasmodia. 
Another study. .  which used a plasmodium as the sample source  ( Nakatani et al.. .  2005b)   a crude extract obtained from the plasmodium of   Physarum melleum was found to display antimicrobial activity against B. . sub- tilis. 
However, the activity was lost when the extract was purified. . It was pro- posed that the unstable yellow pigments were responsible for the antimicrobial  activity. 
In a more recent study, plasmodial cultures of three different myxo- mycetes (Physarella oblonga, P. . melleum, and an unidentified species) were  tested for their antimicrobial activities against B. . subtilis, S. 
aureus, E  coli,  Fusarium oxysporum, Botrytis cinerea, and Rhizoctonia solani by measuring  the diameters of inhibition zones. . Plasmodial extracts of P. . oblonga showed a  low level of toxicity against epymastigote forms of Trypanosoma cruzi but dis- played no evidence of any effect on the growth of other microorganisms. . Simi- larly, in the same research, extracts from an unidentified species of myxomycete  showed strong antimicrobial and antifungal activities against isolated strains of  B. .  cereus, F. 
oxysporum, and Rhizoctonia solani, whereas those from P. . mel- leum displayed a growth inhibition toward F. 
oxysporum  Crude extract from  P. . melleum exhibited a 10–20 mm inhibition zone on F. . oxysporum and a more  than 20 mm inhibition zone on R. . solani  A crude extract from an unidentified  myxomycete strongly inhibited the growth of B. 
subtilis, F. . oxysporum, and R. .  solani (Herrera et al., 2011). 
Crude extracts of P. . oblonga were found to contain  stigmasterol and fatty acids, but the composition of the plasmodial extracts of  two other species was not determined. 
MYXOMYCETE ANTICANCER COMPOUNDS Anticancer compounds. .  including alkaloids (arcyriaflavin C. .  makaluvamine A. .   and makaluvamine C). .  cycloanthranilylproline (fuligocandin B). 
 and the poly- mer polycefin. .  have been isolated from the fruiting bodies and plasmodia of  myxomycetes (Table 11.2). . Among these compounds, there have been several  novel alkaloids with a high potential for cancer treatment. . For example, ar- cyriaflavin analogues have been considered to have great potential as anticancer  drugs, and the pigments of A. 
denudata obtained from the fruiting bodies of  these species were found to contain arcyriarubins A–C as well as arcyriafla- vins A–C and D. . In addition, a new bisindole alkaloid (dihydroarcyriarubin C)  isolated from the fruiting bodies of Arcyria ferruginea showed cytotoxic activ- ity against HeLa cells at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. . Studies of the effect of  this compound on the HeLa cell cycle found that arcyriaflavin C inhibits G2/M  370     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology TABLE 11.2 Myxomycete Antitumor Compounds Species Sample sources Compounds Cancer cells tested References A. . denudate Fruiting body Arcyroxocin B Jurkat cells Kamata et al. 
(2006) A  obvelata Dihydroarcyriacyanin A A. . ferruginea and T. 
 casparyi Fruiting body Arcyriaflavin C P388 leukemia cells,  Hela cells, Wnt signal  inhibitory activity Nakatani et al. . (2003) D  bahiense Fruiting body Makaluvamine A Makaluvamine B Tumor cell-line HCT 116 Human ovarian carci- noma Barrows et al. 
(1993);  Ishibashi et al. . (2001);  Dembitsky et al. . (2005);  Nakatani et al. . (2005a) D  iridis Makaluvamine I L. . epidendrum Fruiting body Two new bisindole  alkaloids Cytotoxic against HeLa. 
  Jurkat   and vincristine  resistant KB/VJ300 cells;  one of them inhibited  protein tyrosine kinase  activity Hosoya et al. . (2005) P  polycephalum Plasmodium Polycefin Tumor brain cells Lee et al. . (2006) MDA–MB 468 breast  tumor cells Ljubimova et al. 
(2008) T  favoginea var. . persimilis Fruiting body Kehokorins A–C HeLa cells Kaniwa et al. . (2006) T  dimorphotheca Fruiting body Tubiferal A VCR-resistant KB cell  lines Kamata et al. . (2006) Tubiferal B Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    371 and G1 phases at low concentrations (100 and 10 ng/mL, respectively) (Na- katani et al., 2003). 
In the follow-up research, cis-dihydroarcyriarubin C and  arcyriaflavin C were found to display Wnt (Wingless-related integration site)  signal inhibitory activity (Kaniwa et al., 2006). . Previously, arcyriaflavin C was isolated from Metatrichia vesparium (Dem- bitsky et al., 2005). . This compound was thought to cause topoisomerase I- mediated DNA cleavage. 
 potent inhibition of protein kinase C and cell-cycle- regulating cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK). .  and cell-cycle checkpoint inhibition  (Nakatani et al.. 
 2003)  Other alkaloids were isolated from fruiting bodies of A. .  denudata (arcyroxocin B) and Arcyria obvelata (dihydroarcyriacyanin A). . Arcy- roxocin B and dihydroarcyriacyanin A exhibited cytotoxic activity against Jur- kat cells with IC50 values of 7 and 10 µg/mL, respectively (Kamata et al., 2006). 
 Another group of alkaloids, the makaluvamines, have been shown to exhibit in  vitro cytotoxicity against the human colon tumor cell line HCT 116 and ovarian  cancer (Dembitsky et al., 2005). . Makaluvamines A and B were isolated from  the fruiting bodies of D. . bahiense (Ishibashi et al., 2001), and makaluvamine  I was produced from the fruiting bodies of Didymium iridis (Nakatani et al.,  2005a). 
In addition to these alkaloids, two novel rearranged triterpenoid lactones,  tubiferal A and tubiferal B, were extracted and purified from fruiting bodies of  Tubifera dimorphotheca. . Tubiferal A showed antitumor activity against vincris- tine-resistant KB cell lines (Kamata et al., 2004). . Moreover, three new diben- zofurans, kehokorins A–C, were isolated from the fruiting bodies of Trichia  favoginea var. 
persimilis. . Among these compounds, kehokorin A was found to  exhibit cytotoxicity against HeLa cells, with an IC50 value of 1.5 µg/mL. . Two  new sterols, trichiol and 3-epitrichiol acetate, were isolated from the fruiting  bodies of T. 
favoginea var. . persimilis and their structures elucidated by spectral  data. 
Trichiol was cytotoxic against HeLa cells. .  while 3-epitrichiol acetate was  shown to exhibit reversal effects against TNF-related apoptosis. .  including the  ligand (TRAIL)-resistant Jurkat cell lines (Kaniwa et al.. .  2006)  In addition,  two new bisindole alkaloids, 6-hydroxystaurosporinone and 5,6-dihydroxyar- cyriaflavin A, were isolated from field-collected fruiting bodies L. . epidendrum. 
 These compounds showed significant cytotoxicity against HeLa and Jurkat cells  as well as slightly weak activity against vincristine-resistant KB/VJ300 cells. .  Remarkably, 6-hydroxystaurosporinone inhibited protein tyrosine kinase activ- ity (Hosoya et al., 2005). . In a subsequent study carried by Hasegawa et al. 
(2007), fuligocandin B  (FCB), a cycloanthranilylproline derivative, was extracted from Fuligo can- dida. . The compound exhibited significant synergism with TRAIL (tumor ne- crosis factor–related apoptosis-inducing ligand), a compound used in cancer  treatment. . Apoptosis could be recorded for TRAIL-resistant cell lines when  these cell lines were treated with FCB and TRAIL. . Single treatment of these  compounds did not lead to apoptosis. . Therefore, fuligocandin B would seem to  have a considerable potential in cancer therapy (Hasegawa et al., 2007). 
372     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The compound with the most potential isolated thus far from myxomyce- tes is polycefin (Figs 11.1 and 11.2 ). . Polycefin is a polymer that was purified  from extracts obtained from the plasmodium of P. . polycephalum. 
Polycefin  was synthesized for targeted delivery of morpholino antisense oligonucleotides  into certain tumors (e.g., breast and brain tumors). . Polycefin was found to be  nontoxic to normal and tumor astrocytes in a wide range of concentrations   ( Lee et al., 2006; Ljubimova et al., 2008). . Polycifin has been considered as the  most remarkable nontoxic, nonimmunogenic, and biodegradable nanoconjugate  drug delivery system currently known (Keller and Everhart, 2010). 
FIGURE 11.1 Polycefin obtained from Physarum polycephalum. . FIGURE 11.2 Plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum as grown in laboratory condition. . Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    373 OTHER BIOACTIVE COMPOUNDS OBTAINED   FROM MYXOMYCETES One of the remarkable results obtained thus far from research on myxomy- cete bioactive compounds was reported by Loganathan (1998). 
 who found that  3. . 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA). .  a neurotransmitter precursor used in  the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. 
 could be commercially produced from  fruiting bodies of Stemonitis herbatica. . As already mentioned, numerous novel compounds have been isolated from  myxomycetes, but only a limited number of those have been investigated for  their biological properties. . Therefore, future research to exploit their medical  applications is crucial. 
Examples of some of the novel compounds isolated from  myxomycetes that have not yet had their functions and/or biological activities  investigated include bisindole sulfate from A. . denudata (Kamata et al., 2006),  arcyxocin A from A. . obvelata (Steglich, 1989), cribrarione B from Cribraria  cancellata (Iwata et al., 2003), cribrarione C from Cribraria meylanii and fuli- goic acid from Fuligo septica f. . flava (Shintani et al., 2009), clionasterol from  Didymium squamulosum (Ishibashi et al., 1999), cycloanthranilylproline from  F. . septica (Nakatani et al., 2003), lycogalic acid A and B and lycogarides A–G  from L. 
epidendrum (Buchanan et al., 1996; Fröde et al., 1994), melleum A and  B from P. . melleum (Nakatani et al., 2005a,b), and physarigins A–C from Physa- rum rigidum (Misono et al., 2003b). 
INITIAL STUDIES ON THE USE OF MYXOMYCETE LIPIDS   FOR BIODIESEL PRODUCTION Biodiesel production from microbial biomass has included two steps. .  which are  lipid extraction and then the conversion of the extracted lipids into biodiesel  through a process called transesterification. 
Microorganisms. .  including micro- algae and various oleaginous microorganisms (yeasts and bacteria). .  have been  considered the best alternatives for the production of oils and fats to replace the  use of agricultural and animal resources. 
The disadvantages of using bacteria  and fungi are related to the limited amount of material that can be produced. .  Algae do not have this problem, but they require a larger acreage to culture  and a longer fermentation period than most other microorganisms (Chinnasamy  et al., 2010). . Lipid extraction from algae and other oleaginous microorganisms  (yeasts and bacteria) involves cell disruption. .  and this process is often chal- lenging to carry out because of the rigid cell walls of these microorganisms. 
 The lipid extraction yield is negatively influenced as a result. . To save time and  energy, direct conversion of biomass into biodiesel (direct transesterification or  in situ transesterification) has been investigated as a replacement of the conven- tional method. 
As described in detail in Chapter 1 of this book and already referred to in  the current chapter. .  the life cycle of a myxomycete is characterized by a distinc- tive multinucleate trophic (feeding) stage called a plasmodium. .  which has no  374     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology cell walls. 
Among the myxomycetes, the plasmodium of P. . polycephalum, a  member of the order Physarales, is particularly interesting because of its rapid  growth rate and ease of culturing. 
Tran et al. . (2012) found that P. 
polycephalum  produced remarkably high amounts of biomass. . Analysis of the lipids present in  the plasmodium of P. . polycephalum by thin layer chromatography (TLC) and  fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) by gas chromatography–mass spectrometry  (GC–MS) techniques showed that the major lipid type present is a triglyceride  (95.5%). .  followed by phospholipids (2.6%). .  diglyceride (0.92%). .  and mono- glyceride (0.92%). 
Myxomycete lipids consist of three dominant fatty acids. .  These are oleic acid (20%), linoleic acid (33%), and palmitoleic acid (17%). .  These results suggested that P. 
polycephalum has considerable potential as a  source of lipids for biodiesel production. . In another study, the same authors  also reported that this myxomycete could produce a relatively high amount of  biomass when grown on defatted rice bran (Tran et al., 2015). . Since a plasmo- dium has no cell walls, the direct conversion into biodiesel is currently under  investigation, with the initial results being positive. . In the research just described, a solid culture was used for biomass pro- duction. . This presents a major challenge for large-scale production. 
However,  some strains of P. . polycephalum have been reported to grow in liquid cultures,  even in 30-L and 50-gal conventional baffled fermenters in pilot studies (Brewer  et al., 1964). . The yields obtained from liquid cultures were 6–10 g DCW/L, but  it should be possible to increase the yield by adjusting the cultivation conditions  as well as the composition of the medium used. . In the research mentioned ear- lier, the culture of this myxomycete in a fermentor was scaled up to a working  volume of 100 L, which resulted in 1 kg dry cell weight (Brewer et al., 1964). 
It should be noted here that when cultured in liquid medium, microplasmo- dia are formed instead of a typical plasmodium (i.e., which is what appears on  a solid culture). . However, microplasmodia do not differ from typical plasmodia  in terms of their basic properties. . Therefore   the results obtained from initial  studies of biodiesel production from plasmodia collected from solid cultures  do provide a relevant foundation for future biodiesel research on the use of  submerged fermentation. 
PART B: MYXOMYCETES IN UNCONVENTIONAL   COMPUTING AND SENSING Andrew Adamatzky The myxomycete P. . polycephalum has a rather sophisticated life cycle (Ste- phenson and Stempen, 1994), which includes fruiting bodies, spores, single- celled myxamoebae, and a multinucleate plasmodium. . The plasmodium is a  coenocyte, and nuclear divisions occur without cytokinesis. . As such, it is a  single cell with thousands of nuclei. 
The plasmodium can reach a consider- able size, up to tens of centimeters when conditions are good. . The plasmodium  consumes microscopic particles and bacteria. . During its foraging behavior, the  Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    375 plasmodium spans scattered sources of nutrients with a network of protoplasmic  tubes. . The plasmodium optimizes its protoplasmic network to cover all sources  of nutrients, to stay away from repellents, and to minimize transportation of  metabolites inside its body. . The ability of the plasmodium to optimize its shape  (Nakagaki et al., 2001) first attracted the attention of biologists, then computer  scientists (Adamatzky, 2010a), and finally engineers. . As a result, the field of  myxomycete computing was born. 
Thus far, the plasmodium is the only useful computation stage of the life cycle  of P. . polycephalum. . Therefore, from this point onward the word Physarum will  be used when referring to the plasmodium. . Most computing and sensing devices  make use of one or more key features of the physiology and behavior of Physarum. .  For example. .  Physarum senses gradients of chemoattractants and repellents (Dur- ham and Ridgway. 
 1976; Rakoczy. .  1963; Ueda et al.. .  1976); it responds to chemi- cal or physical stimulation by changing patterns of electrical potential oscillations  (Durham and Ridgway. 
 1976; Kishimoto. .  1958) and protoplasmic tube contrac- tions (Teplov et al.. .  1991; Wohlfarth-Bottermann. .  1979)  Physarum optimizes its  body to maximize its protoplasm streaming (Dietrich. 
 2015)   and it is made up of  hundreds. .  if not thousands. 
 of biochemical oscillators (Kauffman and Wille. .  1975)    with varied modes of coupling (Grebecki and Cieslawska. 
 1978)  Herein we offer very short descriptions of actual working prototypes of  Physarum-based sensors, computers, actuators, and controllers. . Details can be  found in the pioneer book on Physarum machines (Adamatzky, 2010a) and the  “bible” of myxomycete computing (Adamatzky, 2016). 
SHORTEST PATH When presented with a maze, the objective is to find the shortest path between  the central chamber and an exit. . This was the first problem ever solved by Phy- sarum. . There are two Physarum processors that can solve the maze. . The first  prototype (Nakagaki et al., 2001) works as follows. 
The myxomycete is inocu- lated everywhere in a maze. . Physarum then develops a network of protoplasmic  tubes spanning all channels of the maze. . This network represents all possible  solutions. 
Then, oat flakes are placed at a source and a destination site. . Tubes  lying along the shortest (or near shortest) path between the two sources of nutri- ents develop an increased flow of cytoplasm. . These tubes become thicker. 
Tubes  branching to sites without nutrients become smaller due to the lack of cytoplasm  flow and eventually collapse. . The “thickest” tube represents the shortest path  between the sources of nutrients. . The selection of the shortest protoplasmic tube  is implemented via interaction of propagating biochemical. 
 electrical potential. .   and contractile waves within the mass of the plasmodium (see mathematical  model in Tero et al.. 
 2006)  The approach is not efficient, though because we  must literally distribute the computing substrates everywhere in the physical  representation of the problem. . The number of computing elements would be  proportional to a sum of lengths of the maze’s channels. . 376     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology The second prototype of the Physarum maze solver is based on its che- moattraction. 
An oat flake is placed in the central chamber. . The myxomycete  is inoculated somewhere in a peripheral channel. . The oat flake releases che- moattractants, and these chemoattractants diffuse along the channels of the  maze. . The Physarum explores its vicinity by branching out and thus extending  protoplasmic tubes into the opening of nearby channels. . When a wave front  of diffusing attractants reaches Physarum, it halts lateral exploration. . Instead,  Physarum develops an active growing zone propagating along the gradient of  the attractants’ diffusion. 
The “thickest” tube represents the shortest path be- tween the sources of nutrients (Fig. . 11 3)  This approach is efficient because  the number of computing elements would be proportional to the length of the  shortest path. 
FIGURE 11.3 Plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum “solving” a maze. . (Originally pub- lished in Adamatzky, A., 2012. . Slime mold solves maze in one pass, assisted by gradient of chemo- attractants. 
IEEE Trans. . Nanobiosci.11(2). 
 131–134.) Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    377 SPANNING TREE A spanning tree of a finite planar set is a connected. .  undirected. 
 acyclic planar  graph whose vertices are points of the planar set. . The tree is a minimal span- ning tree where the sum of edge lengths is minimal (Nesetril et al., 2001). . An  algorithm for computing a spanning tree of a finite planar set based on morpho- genesis of a neuron’s axonal tree was initially proposed by Adamatzky (1991). .   for which planar data points are marked by attractants (e.g.. 
 neurotrophins). .  and  a neuroblast is placed at some site. 
Growth cones sprout new filopodia in the  direction of maximal concentration of attractants. . If two growth cones com- pete for the same site of attractants, then a cone with highest energy (closest to  previous site or branching point) wins. . Fifteen years later, we implemented the  algorithm with Physarum (Adamatzky, 2008). 
The degree of Physarum branching is inversely proportional to a quality of  its substrate. . Therefore, to reduce a number of random branches we cultivated  Physarum not on agar but on just humid filter paper. 
The planar data set is rep- resented by a configuration of oat flakes. . Physarum is inoculated at one of the  data sites, and Physarum then propagates to the virgin oat flake closest to the in- oculation site (it branches if there are several virgin flakes nearby). . It colonizes  the next set of flakes. 
The propagation goes on until all data sites are spanned  by a protoplasmic network. . The protoplasmic network approximates the span- ning tree. 
However, the resultant tree does not remain static. . Later cycles can be  formed and the tree is transformed to one of proximity graphs (e.g., a relative  neighborhood graph or a Gabriel graph) (Adamatzky, 2009). 
APPROXIMATION OF TRANSPORT NETWORKS Motorway networks are designed with an aim of efficient vehicular transporta- tion of goods and passengers. . Physarum protoplasmic networks evolved for ef- ficient intracellular transportation of nutrients and metabolites. . To uncover simi- larities between biological and human-made transport networks and to project  behavioral traits of biological networks onto development of vehicular transport  networks. .  we conducted an evaluation and approximation of motorway net- works by Physarum in 14 geographical regions. 
These were Africa, Australia,  Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, Iberia, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, the  Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States (Adamatzky, 2012a). . We represented each region with an agar plate, imitated major urban areas  with oat flakes, inoculated Physarum in a capital, and analyzed the structures of  protoplasmic networks developed. . We found that the networks of protoplasmic  tubes grown by Physarum match, at least partly, the networks of human-made  transport arteries. . The shape of a country and the exact spatial distribution of  urban areas, represented by sources of nutrients, play a key role in determining  the exact structure of the plasmodium network. 
In terms of absolute matching  between Physarum networks and motorway networks. .  the regions studied can be  arranged in the following order of decreasing matching: Malaysia. 
 Italy   Canada    378     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Belgium. .  China   Africa   the Netherlands. .  Germany   the United Kingdom. .  Aus- tralia. .  Iberia   Mexico   Brazil   and the United States. 
We compared the Physarum  and the motorway graphs using such measures as average. .  longest   and short- est paths. 
 average degrees. .  number of independent cycles. 
 the Harary index. .  the   P-index. .  and the Randic index. . Using these measures, we find that motorway net- works in Belgium, Canada, and China are most similar to Physarum networks. 
With regard to measures and topological indices. .  we demonstrated that the  Randic index could be considered the most biocompatible measure of trans- port networks because it matches very well the myxomycete and human-made  transport networks. .  yet efficiently discriminates between transport networks  of different regions (Adamatzky et al.. 
 2013a)  Many curious discoveries have  been made. . Just a few of these are listed next. . All segments of the trans-African  highways not represented by Physarum have components of nonpaved roads  (Adamatzky and Kayem, 2013) (Fig. 
11 4)  For Australia. .  the east coast trans- port chain from the Melbourne urban area in the south to the Mackay area in the  north. .  and the highways linking Alice Springs and Mount Isa and Cloncurry. .  are  represented by the protoplasmic tubes formed by the myxomycete in almost all  experiments in approximation of Australian highways (Adamatzky and Proko- penko. 
 2012)  If the two parts of Belgium were separated with Brussels in Flan- ders. .  the Walloon region of the Belgian transport network would be represented  by a single chain from Tournai in the northwest to the Liege area in the north- east and down to southernmost Arlon; motorway links connecting Brussels with  Antwerp. .  Tournai   Mons   Charleroi. 
 and Namur. .  and links connecting Leuven  with Liege and connecting Antwerp with Genk and Turnhout are redundant  from the point of view of Physarum (Adamatzky et al.. .  2013b)  The protoplas- mic network forms a subnetwork of the human-made motorway network in the  Netherlands; a flooding of a large area around Amsterdam would lead to a sub- stantial increase in traffic at the boundary between the flooded and nonflooded  areas. .  paralysis and abandonment of the transport network. 
 and migration of the  population from the Netherlands to Germany. .  France   and Belgium (Adamatzky  et al.. .  2013b)  Physarum imitates the separation of Germany into East Germany  and West Germany in 1947 (Adamatzky and Schubert, 2012). 
People migrate toward sources of a safe life and higher income. . Physarum  migrates into environmentally conformable areas and toward sources of nutri- ents. . Adamatzky and Martinez (2013) explored this analogy to imitate Mexican  migration to the United States. 
We have made a three-dimensional nylon ter- rain of the United States and placed oat flakes (Fig. . 11 5)   to act as sources  of attractants and nutrients. 
 at 10 areas with the highest concentrations of mi- grants—New York. .  Jacksonville. .  Chicago   Dallas   Houston   Denver   Albuquer- que. .  Phoenix   Los Angeles. .  and San Jose. 
We inoculated Physarum in a locus  between Ciudad Juarez and Nuevo Laredo, allowed it to colonize the template  for 5–10 days, and analyzed the routes of migration. . From results of laboratory  experiments, we extracted topologies of migratory routes, and highlighted the  role of elevations in shaping the human movement networks. 
Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    379 SPACE EXPLORATION We employed the foraging behavior of Physarum to explore scenarios of fu- ture colonization of Earth’s moon and Mars (Adamatzky et al., 2014). . We have  grown Physarum on three-dimensional templates of these celestial bodies. 
 and  analyzed formation of the exploration routes. .  including dynamic reconfigura- tion of the transportation networks as a response to the addition of hubs. . The  developed infrastructures were explored using proximity graphs and Physarum- inspired algorithms of supply chain designs. . Interesting insights about how vari- ous lunar missions may develop and how interactions between hubs and landing  sites can be established are given in Adamatzky et al. 
(2014)  FIGURE 11.4 Trans-African transport formed by the plasmodium of Physarum polyceph- alum. . (Originally published in Adamatzky, A., Kayem, A.V.D.M., 2013. . Biological evaluation of  Trans-African highways. 
Eur  Phys  J  Spec  Top 215  (1), 49–59.) 380     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology TACTILE SENSOR A tactile sensor is a device that responds to a physical contact between the de- vice and an object. . When a segment of a glass capillary tube is placed across a  protoplasmic tube. .  which spans reference and recording electrodes. 
 Physarum  demonstrates two types of responses to application of this load: an immediate  response with a high-amplitude impulse and a prolonged response with changes  in its oscillation pattern (Adamatzky. .  2013a)  The immediate response is a high- amplitude spike, for which the amplitude is 12.33 mV and its duration is 150 s. .  The prolonged response is an envelope of increased amplitude oscillations. 
For  example, an average amplitude of oscillations before stimulation is 2.3 mV  and duration of each wave is 120 s. . The amplitude of waves in the prolonged  response to stimulation is 5.29 mV with a period of a wave increased to 124 s. 
 FIGURE 11.5 Plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum on a terrain model of the United  States. . (Originally published in Adamatzky, A., Martinez, G.J., 2013. . Bio-imitation of Mexican  migration routes to the USA with myxomycete on 3D terrains. 
J  Bionic Eng. . 10 (2), 242–250.) Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    381 The tactile sensor developed is nonreusable. 
While the load rests on the proto- plasmic tube, Physarum starts colonizing the load. . Removal of the load dam- ages the protoplasmic tube. 
To rectify this deficiency, we designed a Physarum  tactile bristle (Adamatzky, 2014). . To make a tactile bristle with Physarum, we stuck a bristle in the agar blob  on the recording electrode. . In a couple of days after inoculation of Physarum  to an agar blob on a references electrode, the Physarum propagates to and colo- nizes the agar blob on a recording electrode. 
Physarum climbs up the bristle and  occupies one-third to half of the bristle’s length. . The sensor works by deflecting  the bristle. . A sensed object does not come into direct contact with Physarum but  only with the tip of the bristle not colonized by Physarum. . A typical response  of Physarum to deflection of the bristle consists of an immediate response—a  high-amplitude impulse—and a prolonged response. 
The high-amplitude im- pulse is always well pronounced. .  but the prolonged response oscillations can  sometimes be distorted by other factors (e.g.. 
 growing branches of a protoplas- mic tube or additional strands of plasmodium propagating between the agar  blobs). . Responses are repeatable not only in different experiments but also dur- ing several rounds of stimulation in the same experiment. . COLOR SENSOR A color sensor is a device that gives a wavelength-dependent response when  illuminated. . Physarum is photo-sensitive. . It changes its pattern of electrical  potential oscillatory activity when illuminated (Block and Wohlfarth-Botter- mann, 1981; Wohlfarth-Bottermann and Block, 1981). . Moreover, Physarum  distinguishes the color of the illumination (Adamatzky, 2013b). 
We placed Phy- sarum between two electrodes and illuminated it with red, green, blue, or white  light. . We also illuminated Physarum with white light via a transparent lens. . The  amount of light on the blob was 80–120 lux for each color. 
We say the Phy- sarum recognizes a color of the light if it reacts to illumination with the color  by a unique change in amplitude and periods of oscillatory activity. . We found  that Physarum recognizes when red and blue light are switched on and when  red light is switched off. 
Red and blue illuminations decrease the frequency  of oscillations. . Red light increases the amplitude of oscillations but blue light  decreases the amplitude. . Physarum does not differentiate between green and  white lights. . Switching off red light leads to increase of period and decrease of  amplitude of oscillations. 
CHEMICAL SENSOR A chemical sensor is a device that gives a selective response when exposed to a  target chemical substance. . Physarum senses and responds to volatile aromatic  substances (Adamatzky, 2011, 2012b; Adamatzky and De Lacy Costello, 2012). .  We studied the binary preferences of Physarum with regard to various volatile  382     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology chemicals (De Lacy Costello and Adamatzky. .  2013) and derived an experimen- tal mapping between subsets of chemoattractants and chemorepellents. 
 includ- ing arnesene. .  tridecane. .  S-(−)-limonene. .  cis-3-hexenylacetate. .  geraniol   ben- zyl alcohol. 
 linalool   nonanal   and the amplitude and frequency of electrical  potential oscillation of Physarum (Whiting et al.. .  2014)  Physarum increases  the frequency of electrical potential oscillations when exposed to the strongest  attractants—farnesene, tridecane, S-(−)-limonene, and cis-3-hexenylacetate. .  Exposure to repellents—linalool, benzyl alcohol, nonanal—leads to a decrease  of oscillation frequency, and, for linalool and benzyl alcohol, an increase of the  oscillation amplitude. 
The Physarum chemical sensor discriminates between in- dividual chemicals by changing amplitude and frequency of its electrical poten- tial oscillations; it can detect a chemical from a distance of several centimeters. . ROBOT CONTROLLERS Physarum responds to stimuli by changing the pattern of its electrical potential  oscillations and cytoplasm shuttling. . By interfacing the Physarum with actua- tors, we can make the myxomycete a controller for robots. 
Two prototypes of  such robotic controllers have been developed. . The first is a controller for a hexa- pod robot (Tsuda et al., 2006), and the second is a controller for a robotic an- droid head (Gale and Adamatzky, 2016). . A Physarum controller for the hexapod  robot is made of a star-shaped template (Tsuda et al., 2006). . It has six circular  wells connected by channels that meet at a single point. 
The Physarum grows  inside the template. . Physarum in each well acts as a cytoplasm shuttle stream- ing oscillator. . The Physarum oscillators in the wells are coupled via the Phy- sarum body colonizing the channels between the wells. 
Blue light is used as a  stimulus. . The shuttle streaming of cytoplasm is measured via light absorbance. .  Oscillations of shuttle streaming in the wells. 
 as a response to a stimulation with  light. .  modulate phase and frequency of the movement of the robot’s legs and  thus cause the robot to change its direction of movement. 
An electrical activity of Physarum in response to stimulations is converted  to an affective state in the design of a Physarum emotional controller (Gale and  Adamatzky, 2016). . A Physarum is inoculated on a multiple-electrode array and  stimulated with nutrients (attractant) and light (repellent). . Extracellular electrical  potential is recorded. 
The recorded data are split into chunks. . We employed a cir- cumplex model of affect, where emotions are plotted in two dimensions deter- mined by the polarity and arousal level. . The chunks are assigned polarity. . Potential  recorded during stimulation with attractant is given positive polarity. . Data obtained  during illumination of Physarum are assigned negative polarity. 
A level of arousal  is proportional to the amplitude of the electrical potential. . Emotions are assigned to  the data chunks based on the polarity and the arousal of chunks and are fed into an  android robot. 
The data activate motors placed in positions matching sites of real  muscles in a human face. . Actuation of the motors causes movements of an artificial  skin. . The movements are expressed as affective facial expression of the android. 
Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    383 MUSIC GENERATION Physarum expresses its physiological states in patterns of its electrical potential  oscillators (Adamatzky and Jones, 2011). . In Adamatzky (2010c), 5–10 days’  recordings were processed and converted to a sound track by mapping param- eters of electrical potential oscillation to pitch, attack, and duration of tones. .  The first-ever sound track was produced from electrical activity in Physarum as  reported by Adamatzky (2010b). . The music reflected a physiological transition  of Physarum from a comfortable foraging state to a state of active search for  disappearing nutrients to a decision-making state to transformation to a scle- rotium. . When the track was played to an auditorium at various presentations. 
  the majority of people had the feeling of a dramatic development in the “life of  Physarum.” Subsequently. .  the transformation of Physarum activity recording  into sounds has been taken to a more professional level. .  from a musical point  of view. .  in Miranda et al. 
(2011)  There, electrical activity of Physarum was  converted to parameters of sinusoidal oscillators; the rhythmic behavior of Phy- sarum was shown to produce different timbres. . Memristive properties of Physarum were used to generate musical respons- es, as reported by Braund et al. 
(2016)  Vocabulary notes were assigned volt- age values, and the Physarum current–voltage response to electrical stimulation  was recorded. . Discrete voltages were converted to notes. . The notes were fed  into a MIDI keyboard. 
During interactive music performance between a human  composer and Physarum, a feedback to the Physarum was implemented. . Parts  of a well-known melody (Elgar’s “Nimrod” and Beethoven’s “Für Elise”) were  generated for live performances with Physarum (Braund et al., 2016). . REFERENCES Adamatzky, A., 1991. 
Neural algorithm for constructing minimal spanning tree. . Neural Network  World 6, 335–339. .  Adamatzky, A., 2008. 
Growing spanning trees in plasmodium machines. . Kybernetes 37 (2), 258– 264. .  Adamatzky, A., 2009. . Developing proximity graphs by Physarum polycephalum: does the plasmo- dium follow the Toussaint hierarchy? Parallel Process. 
Lett  19 (1), 105–127. .  Adamatzky, A., 2010a. 
Physarum Machines: Computers From Slime Mould (World Scientific Se- ries on Non Linear Science Series A: Vol. . 74)  World Scientific, London, England. . Adamatzky, A., 2010b. 
Physarum music. . Available from: https://youtu.be/F79D_YWXycI Adamatzky, A., 2010c. 
Myxomycete logical gates: exploring ballistic approach. . Applications, Tools  and Techniques on the Road to Exascale Computing 41–56 (arXiv:1005.2301). . Adamatzky, A., 2011. 
On attraction of myxomycete Physarum polycephalum to plants with sedative  properties. . Nature Precedings 10. . Adamatzky, A., 2012a. 
Bioevaluation of World Transport Networks. . World Scientific, London, Eng- land. .  Adamatzky, A., 2012b. . Simulating strange attraction of acellular myxomycete Physarum polyceph- alum to herbal tablets. 
Math  Comput  Model  55 (3), 884–900. .  Adamatzky, A., 2013a. 
Myxomycete tactile sensor. . Sens  Actuators B Chem. 
188, 38–44. .  384     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Adamatzky, A., 2013b. . Towards myxomycete colour sensor: recognition of colours by Physarum  polycephalum. 
Org  Electron  14 (12), 3355–3361. .  Adamatzky, A., 2014. 
Tactile bristle sensors made with slime mold. . Sens  J  IEEE 14 (2), 324–332. .  Adamatzky, A., 2016. 
Advances in Physarum Machines: Sensing and Computing With Myxomy- cete. . Springer, Heidelberg, Germany. .  Adamatzky, A., Akl, S., Alonso-Sanz, R., Van Dessel, W., Ibrahim, Z., Ilachinski, A., Jones, J.,  Kayem, A.V.D.M., Martinez, G.J., De Oliveira, P., 2013a. . Are motorways rational from myxo- mycete’s point of view? Int. 
J  Parallel Emergent. . Distrib  Syst  28 (3), 230–248. .  Adamatzky, A., De Lacy Costello, B., 2012. 
Physarum attraction: why slime mold behaves as cats  do? Commun. . Integr  Biol  5 (3), 297–299. .  Adamatzky, A., Jones, J., 2011. . On electrical correlates of Physarum polycephalum spatial activity:  can we see Physarum machine in the dark? Biophys. 
Rev  Lett  6 (01–02), 29–57. .  Adamatzky, A., Kayem, A.V.D.M., 2013. . Biological evaluation of trans-African highways. 
Eur   Phys  J  Spec  Top  215 (1), 49–59. .  Adamatzky, A., Lees, M., Sloot, P., 2013b. . Bio-development of motorway network in the Nether- lands: a myxomycete approach. 
Adv  Complex Syst. . 16 (02–03), 1250034. .  Adamatzky, A., Martinez, G.J., 2013. . Bio-imitation of Mexican migration routes to the USA with  myxomycete on 3D terrains. 
J  Bionic Eng. . 10 (2), 242–250. .  Adamatzky, A., Prokopenko, M., 2012. . Myxomycete evaluation of Australian motorways. 
Int  J   Parallel Emergent Distrib. . Syst  27 (4), 275–295. .  Adamatzky, A., Schubert, T., 2012. . Schlauschleimer in Reichsautobahnen: myxomycete imitates  motorway network in Germany. 
Kybernetes 41 (7–8), 1050–1071. .  Adamatzky, A., Armstrong, R., De Lacy Costello, B., Deng, Y., Jones, J., Mayne, R., Schubert, T.,  Sirakoulis, G.Ch., Zhang, X., 2014. . Myxomycete analogue models of space exploration and  planet colonisation. . J  Br  Interplanet. 
Soc  67, 290–304. .  Asgari, M., Henney, H.R., 1977. 
Inhibition of growth and cell wall morphogenesis of Bacillus sub- tilis by extracellular slime produced by Physarum flavicomum. . Cytobios 20 (79–80), 163–177. .  Barrows, L.R., Radisky, D.C., Copp, B.R., Swaffar, D.S., Kramer, R.A., Warters, R.L., Ireland,  C.M., 1993. 
Makaluvamines, marine natural products, are active anti-cancer agents and DNA  topo II inhibitors. . Anticancer Drug Des. 
8 (5), 333–347. .  Block, I., Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E., 1981. 
Blue light as a medium to influence oscillatory con- traction frequency in Physarum. . Cell Biol  Int  Rep  5 (1), 73–81. .  Braund, E., Sparrow, R., Miranda, M., 2016. 
Physarum-based memristors for computer music. . In:  Adamatzky, A. . (Ed.), Advances in Physarum Machines. . Springer, Heidelberg, Germany. .  Brewer, E.N., Kutraishi, S., Garver, J.C., Strong, F.M., 1964. 
Mass culture of a slime mold, Physa- rum polycephalum. . Appl  Microbiol  12, 161–164. .  Buchanan, M.S., Hashimoto, T., Asakawa, Y., 1996. 
Acylglycerols from the slime mould, Lycogala  epidendrum. . Phytochemistry 41, 791–794. .  Chinnasamy, S., Bhatnagar, A., Hunt, R., Das, K.C., 2010. 
Microalgae cultivation in a wastewater  dominated by carpet mill effluents. . Bioresour  Technol  101, 3097–3105. .  Considine, J.M., Mallette, M.F., 1965. 
Production and partial purification of antibiotic materials  formed by Physarum gyrosum. . Appl  Microbiol  13, 464–468. .  De Lacy Costello, B., Adamatzky, A., 2013. 
Assessing the chemotaxis behavior of Physarum poly- cephalum to a range of simple volatile organic chemicals. . Commun  Integr  Biol  6 (5), e25030. .  Dembitsky, V.M., Rezanka, T., Spizek, J., Hanus, L.O., 2005. 
Secondary metabolites of slime molds  (myxomycetes). . Phytochemistry 66 (7), 747–769. .  Dietrich, M.R., 2015. 
Explaining the pulse of protoplasm: the search for molecular mechanisms of  protoplasmic streaming. . J  Integr  Plant Biol. . 57 (1), 14–22. .  Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    385 Durham, A.C., Ridgway, R.B., 1976. 
Control of chemotaxis in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Cell  Biol. 
69 (1), 218–223. .  Fergus, C.L., Mallette, M.F., 1962. 
Pure culture of the slime mold Physarum gyrosum. . Mycologia  54, 580–581. .  Fröde, R., Hinze, C., Josten, I., Schmidt, B., Steffian, B., Steglich, W., 1994. . Isolation and synthesis  of 3,4-bis(indol-3-yl)pyrrole-2,5-dicarboxylic acid derivatives from the slime mould Lycogala  epidendrum. 
Tetrahedron Lett. . 35, 1689–1690. 
 Gale, E., Adamatzky, A., 2016. . Translating myxomycete responses: a novel way to present data to  the public. 
In: Adamatzky, A. . (Ed.), Advances in Physarum Machines. . Springer, Heidelberg,  Germany. .  Grebecki, A., Cieslawska, M., 1978. 
Plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum as a synchronous  contractile system. . Cytobiologie 17 (2), 335–342. .  Hasegawa, H., Yamada, Y., Komiyama, K., Hayashi, M., Ishibashi, M., Sunazuka, T., Izuhara, T.,  Sugahara, K., Tsuruda, K., Masuda, M., Takasu, N., Tsukasaki, K., Tomonaga, M., Kamihira,  S., 2007. 
A novel natural compound. .  a cycloanthranilylproline derivative (Fuligocandin B). .   sensitizes leukemia cells to apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis-in- ducing ligand (TRAIL) through 15-deoxy-∆12. 
14 prostaglandin J2 production. . Blood 110 (5),  1664–1674. .  Hashimoto, T., Yasuda, A., Akazawa, K., Takaoka, S., Tori, M., Asakawa, Y., 1994. . Three novel di- methyl pyrroledicarboxylate, lycogarubins A-C, from the myxomycetes Lycogala epidendrum. 
 Tetrahedron Lett. . 35, 2559–2560. .  Herrera, N.A., Rojas, C., Franco-Molano, A.E., Stephenson, S.L., Echeverri, F., 2011. . Physarella  oblonga-centered bioassays for testing the biological activity of myxomycetes. . Mycosphere 6,  637–644. .  Hosoya, T., Yamamoto, Y., Uehara, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2005. 
New cy- totoxic bisindole alkaloids with protein tyrosine kinase inhibitory activity from a myxomycete  Lycogala epidendrum. . Bioorg  Med  Chem  Lett  15, 2776–2780. .  Ishibashi, M., Iwasaki, T., Imai, S., Sakamoto, S., Yamaguchi, K., Ito, A., 2001. . Laboratory culture  of the myxomycetes: formation of fruiting bodies of Didymium bahiense and its plasmodial  production of makaluvamine A. 
J  Nat  Pro  64, 108–110. .  Ishibashi, M., Mitamura, M., Ito, A., 1999. . Laboratory culture of the myxomycete Didymium squa- mulosum and its production of clionasterol. 
Nat  Med  53, 316–318. .  Iwata, D., Ishibashi, M., Yamamoto, Y., 2003. 
Cribrarione B, a new naphthoquinone pigment from  the myxomycete Cribraria cancellata. . J  Nat  Prod  66, 1611–1612. .  Kamata, K., Onuki, H., Hirota, H., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Sato, M., Ishibashi,  M., 2004. . Tubiferal, A, a backbone-rearranged triterpenoid lactone isolated from the myxomy- cete Tubifera dimorphotheca, possessing reversal of drug resistance activity. 
Tetrahedron Lett. .  60 (44), 9835–9839. .  Kamata, K., Suetsugu, T., Yamamoto, Y., Hayashi, M., Komiyama, K., Ishibashi, M., 2006. 
Bisin- dole alkaloids from myxomycetes Arcyria denudata and Arcyria obvelata. . J  Nat  Prod  69 (8),  1252–1254. .  Kaniwa, K., Arai, M.A., Li, X., Ishibashi, M., 2006. 
Synthesis, determination of stereochemistry,  and evaluation of new bisindole alkaloids from the myxomycete Arcyria ferruginea: an ap- proach for Wnt signal inhibitor. . Bioorg  Med  Chem  Lett  17, 4254–4257. .  Kauffman, S., Wille, J.J., 1975. 
The mitotic oscillator in Physarum polycephalum. . J  Theor  Biol   55 (1), 47–93. .  Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., 2010. 
Importance of myxomycetes in biological research and teaching. .  Fungi 3 (1), 13–27. .  386     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Kishimoto, U., 1958. . Rhythmicity in the protoplasmic streaming of a slime mood, Physarum poly- cephalum. . i  A statistical analysis of the electrical potential rhythm. 
J  Gen  Physiol  41 (6),  1205–1222. .  Lee, B.S., Fujita, M., Khazenzon, N.M., Wawrowsky, K.A., Wachsmann-Hogiu, S., Farkas, D.L.,  Black, K.L., Ljubimova, J.Y., Holler, E., 2006. 
Polycefin, a new prototype of a multifunc- tional nanoconjugate based on poly(β-l-malic acid) for drug delivery. . Bioconjug  Chem  17  (2), 317–326. .  Ljubimova, J.Y., Fujita, M., Khazenzon, N.M., Lee, B.S., Wachsmann-Hogiu, S., Farkas, D.L.,  Black, K.L., Holler, E., 2008. 
Nanoconjugate based on polymalic acid for tumor targeting. .  Chem  Biol  Interact  171 (2), 195–203. 
 Locquin, M., Prevot, A.R., 1948. . Etude de quelques antibiotiques produits par les myxomycetes. .  Ann  Inst  Pasteur Paris 75, 8–13. .  Loganathan, P., 1998. 
Production of DL-DOPA from acellular slime-mould Stemonitis herbatica. .  Bioprocess Eng. 
18, 307–308. .  Mayberry, J.M., Fergus, C.L., Mallette, M.F., 1962. 
Pure culture of the slime mold Physarum gyro- sum. . Mycologia 54, 580–581. .  Miranda, E.R., Adamatzky, A., Jones, J., 2011. 
Sounds synthesis with myxomycete of Physarum  polycephalum. . J  Bionic Eng. 
8 (2), 107–113. .  Misono, Y., Ishibashi, M., Ito, A., 2003a. 
Bahiensol, a new glycerolipid from a cultured myxomy- cete Didymium bahiense var. . bahiense  Chem  Pharm  Bull  (Tokyo) 51 (5), 612–613. .  Misono, Y., Ito, A., Matsumoto, J., Sakamoto, S., Yamaguchi, K., Ishibashi, M., 2003b. . Physarigins  A–C, three new yellow pigments from cultured myxomycete Physarum rigidum. 
Tetrahedron  Lett. . 44, 4479–4481. .  Nakagaki, T., Yamada, H., Toth, A., 2001. . Path finding by tube morphogenesis in an amoeboid  organism. . Biophys  Chem  92 (1), 47–52. .  Nakatani, S., Kamata, K., Sato, M., Onuki, H., Hirota, H., Matsumoto, J., Ishibashi, M., 2005b. .  Melleumin A, a novel peptide lactone isolated from the cultured myxomycete Physarum mel- leum. 
Tetrahedron Lett. . 46, 267–271. 
 Nakatani, S., Kiyota, M., Matsumoto, J., Ishibashi, M., 2005a. . Pyrroloiminoquinone pigments from  Didymium iridis. . Biochem  Syst  Ecol  33, 323–325. .  Nakatani, S., Naoe, A., Yamamoto, Y., Yamauchi, T., Yamaguchi, N., Ishibashi, M., 2003. 
Isolation  of bisindole alkaloids that inhibit the cell cycle from myxomycetes Arcyria ferruginea and  Tubifera casparyi. . Bioorg  Med  Chem  Lett  13 (17), 2879–2881. .  Naoe, A., Ishibashi, M., Yamamoto, Y., 2003. . Cribrarione A, a new antimicrobial naphthoquinone  pigment from a myxomycete Cribraria purpurea. 
Tetrahedron 59, 3433–3435. .  Nesetril, J., Milkova, E., Nesetrilova, H., 2001. . Otakar Boruvka on minimum spanning tree prob- lem: translation of both the 1926 papers, comments, history. 
Discrete Math. . 233 (1), 3–36. .  Rakoczy, L., 1963. . Application of crossed light and humidity gradients for the investigation of  slime-molds. 
Acta Soc  Bot  Pol  32 (2), 393–403. .  Rˇezanka, T., Dvorˇáková, R., 2003. 
Polypropionate lactones of deoxysugars glycosides from slime  mold Lycogala epidendrum. . Phytochemistry 63 (8), 945–952. .  Rˇezanka, T., Dvorˇáková, R., Hanuš, L.r.O., 2004. 
Enteridinines A and B from slime mold Enteridi- um lycoperdon. . Phytochemistry 65 (4), 455–462. .  Rˇezanka, T., Hanus, L.O., Kujan, P., Dembitsky, V.M., 2005. 
The fulicineroside, a new unusual  glycosidic dibenzofuran metabolite from the slime mold Fuligo cinerea (L.) Wiggers. . Eur  J   Org  Chem  13, 2708–2714. .  Sawada, T., Aono, M., Asakawa, S., Ito, A., Awano, K., 2000. 
Structure determination and total  synthesis of a novel antibacterial substance, AB0022A, produced by a cellular slime mold. . J   Antibiot  (Tokyo) 53 (9), 959–966. .  Uses and Potential  Chapter | 11    387 Schroeder, H.R., Mallette, M.F., 1973. 
Isolation and purification of antibiotic material from Physa- rum gyrosum. . Antimicrob. . Agents Chemother. 
4, 160–166. .  Shintani, A., Ohtsuki, T., Yamamoto, Y., Hakamatsuka, T., Kawahara, N., Goda, Y., Ishibashi, M.,  2009. . Fuligoic acid, a new yellow pigment with a chloronated polyene-pyrone acid structure  isolated from the myxomycete Fuligo septica f. . flava  Tetrahedron Lett. 
50, 3189–3190. .  Sobels, J.C., 1950. . Nutrition de quelque myxomycetes en cultures et associees et leurs proprietes  antibiotiques. 
Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek J. . Microbiol  Serol  16, 123–243. .  Steglich, W., 1989. . Slime molds (myxomycetes) as a source of new biologically active metabolites. 
 Pure Appl. . Chem  61, 281–288. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press,  Portland, OR. .  Taylor, R.L., Mallette, M.F., 1976. 
Growth of Physarum gyrosum on agar plates and in liquid cul- ture. . Antimicrob. . Agents Chemother., 613–617. .  Teplov, V.A., Romanovsky, Y.R., Latushkin, O.A., 1991. 
A continuum model of contraction waves  and protoplasm streaming in strands of Physarum plasmodium. . Biosystems 24 (4), 269–289. .  Tero, A., Kobayashi, R., Nakagaki, T., 2006. . Physarum solver: a biologically inspired method of  road-network navigation. 
Phys  A 363 (1), 115–119. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Chen, J., Pollock, E.D., Goggin, F.L., 2012. 
Evaluating the po- tential use of myxomycetes as a source of lipids for biodiesel production. . Bioresour  Technol   123, 386–389. .  Tran, H.T.M., Stephenson, S.L., Pollock, E.D., 2015. 
Evaluation of Physarum polycephalum plas- modial growth and lipid production using rice bran as a carbon source. . BMC Biotechnol. . 15,  67   Tsuda, S., Zauner, K.P., Gunji, Y.P., 2006. 
Robot control: from silicon circuitry to cells. . Biologi- cally Inspired Approaches to Advanced Information Technology, vol. 
3853  Springer, Berlin,  Heidelberg, pp. . 20–32  Ueda, T., Muratsugu, M., Kurihara, K., Kobatake, Y., 1976. 
Chemotaxis in Physarum polyceph- alum: effects of chemicals on isometric tension of the plasmodial strand in relation to chemo- tactic movement. . Exp  Cell Res  100 (2), 337–344. .  Whiting, J.G.H., De Lacy Costello, B., Adamatzky, A., 2014. 
Towards myxomycete chemical sen- sor: mapping chemical inputs onto electrical potential dynamics of Physarum polycephalum. .  Sens  Actuators B Chem. 
191, 844–853. .  Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E., 1979. . Oscillatory contraction activity in Physarum. . J  Exp  Biol  81  (1), 15–32. .  Wohlfarth-Bottermann, K.E., Block, I., 1981. 
The pathway of photosensory transduction in Physa- rum polycephalum. . Cell Biol  Int  Rep  5 (4), 365–373. .  FURTHER READING Adamatzky, A., 2013. 
Physarum wires: self-growing self-repairing smart wires made from slime  mould. . Biomed  Eng  Lett  3 (4), 232–241. .  Page left intentionally blank 389 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00012-3 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. 
Chapter 12 Myxomycetes in Education:   The Use of These Organisms   in Promoting Active and  Engaged Learning Katherine E. . Winsett*, Thomas Edison E. . dela Cruz**. .    Diana Wrigley de Basanta† *Wake Technical Community College. .  Raleigh   NC   United States; **University of Santo   Tomas. .  Manila   Philippines; †Royal Botanic Garden (CSIC). 
 Madrid   Spain INTRODUCTION Myxomycetes are a potentially important educational tool and represent an ex- cellent component of classroom activities for students of almost any age. . They  provide an opportunity to work with living organisms that pose little or no risk  to students or teachers. . Myxomycetes are nonpathogenic, nontoxic, and hypoal- lergenic, and will not affect other plants or animals. 
In addition, they are an  inexpensive, locally available natural resource, irrespective of where a school  might be located. . Myxomycetes are commonly used as examples of protists in  biology textbooks in the United States and other countries. 
 primarily because  of their extraordinary life cycle. .  and they are excellent model organisms for a  variety of educational uses. . The biology of myxomycetes is such that their uses in an educational set- ting are both diverse and appropriate for all levels of education (Tables 12.1  and 12.2). 
The relative ease with which they are cultured from decaying plant  material obtained from virtually any source (even including houseplants). .  their  maintenance at any life stage in the classroom laboratory. 
 and the opportunity  to demonstrate standard concepts of biology as they relate to organisms outside  of the animal and plant kingdoms make myxomycetes a unique addition to any  classroom or educational program. . This chapter provides a discussion of how  myxomycetes have been used in formal and informal classroom environments  involving students of various ages and skill levels. 
Elsewhere in this volume  (Chapter 1) there are detailed descriptions of the biology of these organisms. . 390     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology TABLE 12.1 Examples of Learning Outcomes and Suggested Learning  Activities With Myxomycetes Levels Learning   activities Kinder- garten Elementary  school Junior and  senior high  school Under- graduate Expected   student learning  outcomes Collecting  myxomycetes in  the field √ √ √ √ Remembering Setting up moist  chamber culture √ √ √ √ Remembering Understanding Applying Storing fruiting  bodies and  maintaining a  collection √ √ √ Remembering Understanding Applying Culturing  myxomcyetes on  agar √ √ Understanding Applying Creating Observing fruit- ing bodies √ √ √ √ Applying Evaluating Observing life  cycle of myxo- mycetes √ √ Applying Evaluating Identifying  myxomycetes  using online  resources √ √ Applying Analyzing Evaluating Classifying  myxomycetes √ √ Applying Analyzing Evaluating Assessing  ecological  patterns of  myxomycetes √ √ Analyzing Evaluating Observing feed- ing behavior of  myxomycetes √ √ Applying Evaluating Developing  infomaterials   for   myxomycetes √ √ Creating Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    391 Myxomycetes can be used to teach any number of scientific concepts rang- ing from observation to classification. 
 and they can even serve as a subject to  introduce the concepts of molecular biology. . It would be futile for us to attempt  to describe all of the ways in which myxomycetes can be used in the teaching  of science. 
 but the following examples are derived from our combined experi- ence teaching in classrooms. .  workshops. .  and laboratories. .  as well as in the field. 
 There are references to additional work appearing in the literature, and some of  the examples are organized into informal lesson plans. . What we have learned from using myxomycetes in the teaching of science  is that they are outside the experience of many people. . Their use for teach- ing concepts is valuable, but these organisms are unique. . They are different  from the more familiar organisms (plants. .  animals   and fungi normally used  in the classroom setting). .  but they offer both a valuable tool in the classroom  and a totally new experience for students. 
The techniques used for isolating  myxomycetes from nature are quite simple. . Once they are mastered, a whole  world of opportunity opens up for using these organisms to educate any audi- ence about any number of scientific concepts. . The techniques described in the  next section are only ways in which we have used myxomycetes, along with  a general discussion of alternative opportunities. . Consider these descriptions  a jumping-off point. 
They were and are successful in our experience. .  but we  have every confidence that with the information presented in the rest of this  volume. 
 as well as experience in the techniques described in this chapter. .  any  and all teachers of science can find a number of other uses for these organisms  in their own classrooms. . TABLE 12.2 Some Examples of the Use of Myxomycetes in High School  Biology Courses Topic Examples Cell biology Characteristics of living things. 
 cell structures. .  cell  reproduction. .  synchronous mitosis. .  cyclosis Organismal biology Phagocytosis. 
 food vacuoles. .  digestion. .  egestion   response  to stimuli Behavior Food preferences. .  feeding rates. 
 simple mazes Classification Taxonomic characters. .  taxonomic problems. .  use of  dichotomous keys. 
 making permanent slide mounts Ecology Microbial predation. .  nutrient recycling. .  importance of  microorganisms in ecosystems. 
 ecological models and  indices. .  comparisons of ecological parameters Independent projects Most of the aforementioned. .  also cooperation in  science with group projects. 
 formulation of hypotheses. .   experimental design. 
 writing a scientific paper 392     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology TECHNIQUES To acquire sample specimens for use or to develop other inquiry-based teaching  opportunities requires a handful of relatively simple techniques. . Each of these  is discussed here. 
Collecting Myxomycetes in the Field Myxomycetes are found everywhere, including every known terrestrial habitat  examined to date. . Wherever decaying plant material (e.g.. .  decaying wood and  dead leaves) is present. 
 myxomycetes will thrive. .  feeding on microorganisms. .   such as bacteria and fungi. .  that are associated with the decomposition of such  material. 
In the field, myxomycetes form tiny fruiting bodies. . For most species,  their minute fruiting bodies are no taller than a millimeter or two; hence close  observation of decaying plant material is needed to see them. . Other species may  form conspicuous fruiting structures easily visible to the naked eye. . Some of  these are 20 cm or more in maximum extent. 
To observe myxomycetes directly  during field collecting, it is usually necessary to use a hand lens or an eye lens  similar to what watchmakers use. . With this tool, you can observe specimens  directly in the field and bring back to the laboratory the fruiting bodies of only  myxomycetes and not something else. . There are many small fruiting bodies of  fungi also present in the field that can easily be mistaken for those of a myxo- mycete. 
But before a teacher goes on a field trip with students, it is important to  secure any permits necessary to visit the collecting area. . Securing such permits  early saves much valuable time. 
It is also important to learn as much as possible,  in advance, about the collecting area. . Moreover, it is useful to take a map along  during the collecting trips to identify the different habitat types where myxo- mycetes and the substrates with which they are associated can be collected. . If  the students are to assess ecological patterns, it is important to describe each  of the collecting areas or sampling points. . Important parameters that should be  noted include the type of habitat, GPS coordinates, common plant genera within  the sampling area, elevation, and canopy coverage. . A checklist of relevant en- vironmental parameters (e.g., relative humidity and temperature) can also be  included. 
Collecting myxomycetes in the field requires a certain amount of timing. .  Fruiting bodies often appear a week or so after a heavy rain followed by sunny  days. . When the ideal climatic conditions occur, students can be taken to the cho- sen sampling areas. . Piles of leaf litter on the ground or decaying twigs should  be examined. 
These represent ideal places for myxomycetes to thrive and later  form fruiting bodies. . In wooded areas, decaying logs and stumps also should  be checked for myxomycetes. . Ideal logs for myxomycetes are those that retain  moisture and show obvious evidence of decay. 
Fruiting bodies on a piece of  substrate observed directly in the field and then collected can be glued to a  small piece of paper cut to fit in a small cardboard “pill box.” Alternatively. .  a  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    393 compartmentalized plastic or tin container lined with corkboard can be used to  pin pieces of substrate that have fruiting bodies of myxomycetes present. . While  in the field, students can also collect samples to use for preparing moist chamber  cultures. 
Leaf litter on the ground and dead but still attached plant parts above  the ground. .  twigs   pieces of the dead outer bark from living trees. .  dead grass. 
  inflorescences. .  decayed fruits. .  or soil can be collected and placed in paper bags. 
  brought to the laboratory. .  and placed in moist chamber cultures. . If these materi- als are wet when collected, it is ideal to air-dry these samples before setting up  moist chamber cultures. 
More detail relating to the procedures used for isolating  myxomycetes can be found in Chapter 10. . Setting Up Moist Chamber Cultures While many of the more common species of myxomycetes are found regularly  and relatively easily in nature. .  the most efficient way to acquire specimens for  study is through the culturing of dead plant material. 
A thorough description of  this technique is found in Stephenson and Stempen (1994) and in Chapter 10 of  this volume, but a brief outline of the technique is supplied herein. . Fortunately  for educators, this is a simple technique that can be accomplished using basic  laboratory materials or readily available alternatives. 
In its simplest description,  a moist chamber culture is the establishment of a microcosm of the environment  in which these organisms are found in nature. . Decaying plant material (includ- ing dead leaves or twigs) is kept moist over a period of weeks, providing the  microhabitat necessary for myxomycetes to go through their life cycle. . In the  laboratory, a Petri dish is lined with filter paper on which a single layer of the  decaying plant material is placed, and then the material is covered with distilled  water. . The dish and its contents are kept covered, and after 24 h the water is  poured off. . Every few days, a little distilled water is added to keep the filter  paper wet but with no standing water. 
The covered Petri dish is placed in indi- rect light and is now a simple version of the type of microhabitat in nature that  generally promotes myxomycetes to go through their life cycle. . Different spe- cies will emerge at different times. 
 but after a few weeks the fruiting bodies of  some of the more common species can be found fruiting on the leaves or twigs  or even the filter paper and in some cases the sides or top of the Petri dish. . The  spores of myxomycetes are found everywhere, so it is reasonable to assume that  spores will be added to each dish along with the dead plant material. . However, it  is often the case that myxomycete fruiting bodies do not emerge in some moist  chamber cultures. . Even when the dead plant material comes from the same col- lected sample, some cultures are not successful. . It is not fully understood why,  but to maximize the chances of finding fruiting bodies in culture, one should  set up replicates from each sample. 
A handful of leaves from the ground can be  used to set up a number of moist chamber cultures. . The materials used for the moist chamber culture technique are available  in any catalog of scientific or laboratory supplies. 
 and they are reasonably  394     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology inexpensive. . However, because the purpose is just to create a microhabitat to  promote the life cycle of myxomycetes, other materials can be used. 
For exam- ple, the filter paper used to maintain moisture levels in the dish can be replaced  with a circle of paper towel. . If plastic or glass Petri dishes are not available,  clear plastic containers like those in which food is stored, lined on the bottom  with paper towels, can serve the same purpose. 
Once a week, the plates should be examined using a dissecting microscope  (ideally) or a magnifying glass to look for plasmodium and fruiting bodies. .  Some species are visible with the naked eye, but some magnification is ideal to  confirm that the structure observed is indeed the fruiting body of a myxomycete. . Storing Fruiting Bodies and Maintaining a Collection Once fruiting bodies are found in nature or obtained in moist chamber cultures. .   it is necessary to allow them to dry to prevent colonization by fungi or the loss  of spores. 
The myxomycete fruiting body will be found attached to some sub- strate, usually a piece of a dead leaf or a twig. . This substrate material is removed  along with the attached fruiting bodies for storage. 
Like plant specimens found in a herbarium or pressed between the pages  of a book, dried specimens of myxomycetes can maintain the structures nec- essary for identification. . In the case of myxomycetes, the substrate—the leaf  or piece of wood to which the fruiting body is attached—can be glued using  simple white glue to a strip of card-stock paper. 
These strips can then be stored  in matchboxes or other similarly sized cardboard boxes (Fig. . 12 1)  Cardboard  “pill boxes” can be ordered from scientific supply catalogs, but a collection of  matchboxes can serve the same purpose quite well. . To examine any specimen,  the card-stock paper with the specimen attached can be removed, thus provid- ing easier access to the sample. . Once dried, these specimens can be stored for  many years. 
Culture of Myxomycetes on Agar It is also possible to see the stages of the life cycle in agar culture as has been  discussed in Chapter 10. . This technique is quite beneficial for creating a way  in which to see the microscopic components of the life cycle. . For example, the  plasmodia of species in the order Physarales are visible to the naked eye because  of their size and remarkable colors. . Developing the same plasmodium in agar  culture allows for viewing the cytoplasmic streaming within the plasmodium  under a microscope. 
The study of agar culture of myxomycetes is quite interest- ing. . It has not been possible to get all species to go from spore to spore in agar  culture (Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta. .  2008)   and even within species that  can easily be induced to go from spore to spore in culture. 
 different samples do  not have equal success. . There is no clear indication of why this is the case, but it  has been observed regularly. 
Fortunately, for those specimens that do germinate  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    395 and go through the life cycle in culture, many will do so quite easily. . The easiest  way to get started culturing myxomycetes on agar is to use the strains available  from biological supply companies. . Carolina Biological Supply (Carolina.com)  has a strain of Physarum polycephalum that is an excellent example of a readily  available sample that will grow very well, and do so repeatedly. 
Haskins and Wrigley de Basanta (2008) provide a good review of the tech- niques for establishing agar cultures of various species of myxomycetes. . The  key for establishing successful cultures is to provide food organisms without  the plate becoming overwhelmed with the hyphae of fungi. 
While we direct  you to the aforementioned paper for a detailed explanation of techniques. .  it is  worth noting that for high school and undergraduate students. .  the value of the  elements of the life cycle that can be revealed through agar culture should not be  dismissed. . An agar plate can be placed on the stage of a compound microscope,  allowing an unprecedented view of the amoeboflagellate cells, the plasmodium,  and cytoplasmic streaming within the plasmodium. . If a specimen in your collec- tion is identified as one that will germinate easily, another technique is to make  an agar slide (F. 
Spiegel, personal communication). . A small cube of agar (water  agar is appropriate) can be melted onto the slide by placing the cube on a glass  slide, setting a cover slip over top, and passing the slide gently across a flame. .  Allow the agar to cool, remove the cover slip, place some spores onto the sur- face of the agar, and then replace the cover slip. 
The spores can germinate on the  FIGURE 12.1 Placing specimens of myxomycetes collected in the field into small pasteboard  boxes. . 396     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology agar. 
 and the technique allows students to see germination and the movement of  amoeboflagellates for themselves with unprecedented clarity through the use of  a compound microscope. . Identifying Myxomycetes As is the case with other organisms, such as plants and animals, identification  of myxomycetes relies heavily on morphological features. 
Examples of mor- phological features are the type. .  color   and appearance of the fruiting body and  its parts (e.g.. 
 hypothallus. .  peridium   and stalk) and the presence or absence of  whitish powder or lime. . These are often best observed under a dissecting mi- croscope, but a hand lens will work, too. . Detailed observations of spores, capil- litium, and other microscopic features are also observed under a compound light  microscope. 
All morphometric data are then compared with species descriptions  in the published literature and/or online identification guides for species identi- fication. . The monograph (The Myxomycetes) by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969)  is one of the most comprehensive books, with detailed descriptions of a large  number of species of myxomycetes. . However, this book is no longer in print,  and securing a copy is often very difficult or almost impossible. . Additional ref- erences on myxomycete identification that have been published more recently  and contain detailed morphological features and photographs of specimens  include Neubert et al. 
(1993, 1995, 2000), Stephenson and Stempen (1994),  and Poulain et al. . (2011)  Online identification guides are also easily accessible  for species identification. . Websites   such as those constructed as a result of the  Eumycetozoan Research Project based at the University of Arkansas (http:// slimemold.uark.edu). .  contain searchable databases and images of myxomyce- tes for easy comparison. .  as well as other educational materials relating to these  organisms. 
The website of Discover Life in America (http://www.discoverlife. . org) has many images and other useful information. .  and many other websites  developed by various individuals who work with myxomycetes provide images  (often rather spectacular) that have been identified. . A Google search for myxo- mycete images will easily reveal many of these. 
In a study carried out by dela  Cruz et al. . (2012), students were found to be highly visual and thus preferred a  tool with images more than the plainly written keys available for species iden- tification. . One of the great benefits of teaching with myxomycetes is the relative sim- plicity of the techniques used to grow them. . With very few differences. 
 the tech- niques outlined earlier are standard for those individuals who are involved in  carrying out research directed toward studying many aspects of the biology and  ecology of these organisms. . For this reason, the study of myxomycetes is ac- cessible to students of biology at all levels. . What follows are some examples of  concepts that can be studied using myxomycetes and some examples from the  collective experiences of the coauthors. . These are summarized in Table 12.1. 
 It is worth noting that we recognize that there are very few courses that have  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    397 myxomycetes as an explicit topic of study. .  so the examples presented herein are  descriptions of how we have used these organisms in various ways to illustrate  or teach general science or biology topics and not just to teach about the myxo- mycetes themselves. . Collecting and Classifying Myxomycetes Using the basic technique for moist chamber cultures described herein, set up  a series of cultures using available ground litter. . This in itself can be an activity  for students (from elementary through high school) allowing for opportunities  to observe the litter using a magnifying glass. .  or the cultures can be set up ahead  of time and then used when myxomycetes have developed. 
An identification  guide of common species (Fig. . 12.2) can be used as an initial tool for students  to match the myxomycetes developed in a moist chamber as an exercise in clas- sification. . Less important in this exercise are the names of the species, which are  all in Latin since, unlike most plants and animals, there are very few common  names for particular species of myxomycetes. 
Instead   students can use tools. .   such as a magnifying glass. .  to observe these nearly microscopic specimens and  to recognize the differences that exist among different species. .  as well as the  detail that can be observed even in such small organisms. . Myxomycetes can be  easily saved in matchboxes for use in the future, ultimately building up a collec- tion that can be used for this exercise year after year. . The materials and method  for doing this are described in Chapter 10. 
Observations What may seem a basic concept, using myxomycetes to develop observational  skills, is an opportunity that spans all age levels. . There is a great deal to be  observed when examining the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes. 
There are many  colorful examples that can be seen with the naked eye, but with every increase  in magnification there is even more to see. . The fruiting bodies exhibit different  shapes and sizes, the stalks can be smooth or furrowed, and the spores mass  itself can show striking differences in color. . These characteristics can be seen  quite easily with something as simple as a magnifying glass or jeweler’s loupe. .  If a dissecting microscope is available, students can get a clear view of the ma- jor structures of the myxomycete fruiting body. . Further magnification. 
 which  is possible by making a slide and observing the spores and capillitium through  a compound microscope. .  offers even further opportunities for observing the  characteristics used in identification. 
The spores and capillitium often have a  distinctive or even unique ornamentation, which is important in the classifica- tion of myxomycetes. . The life stages of a myxomycete are significantly different from those of  plants, animals, or fungi. . Some stages of their life history seem to counter the  accepted norms taught in general biology. 
For example, the plasmodium is a  398     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology single cell, but it is often relatively large and easily visible to the naked eye. . Its  irregular shape and movement strategy belie the usual assumption of the ideal- ized cell and its organelles as depicted in textbooks and models. . The plasmo- dium is an excellent example of a multinucleate cell—a single cell that contains  many nuclei. . The nuclei undergoes mitosis, but cytokinesis (cell division) does  not occur. . This allows the cell to become larger and larger. 
While this makes for  FIGURE 12.2 Example of an identification guide (or photo guide) used to identify common  species of myxomycetes. . Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    399 an interesting example when teaching about cell division. .  the ease with which  a plasmodium can be grown in culture enhances the opportunity to observe the  details. 
A simple technique is to place a sclerotium of P. . polycephalum obtained  from a biological supply house on a thin layer of water agar in a Petri dish with  a few rolled oats present. 
The bright yellow plasmodium will activate in a few  hours, and students can observe cytoplasmic streaming and see the multiple  nuclei under a basic dissecting microscope. . While there are images of the life  stages to be found in the literature and on the web. .  the films produced at the Uni- versity of Iowa in 1961 represent one of the best opportunities to see and hear  a description of the life cycle and see the life stages in action. . There are three  of these films—entitled Slime Molds I, II, and III—that feature excellent time- lapse photography and photomicrographs (Koevenig et al., 1961). . Fortunately,  copies of these films can still be found, but at present the easiest access to high- quality versions of their content is in the Internet Archive (e.g., https://archive. 
org/details/slimemolds3identification). . The first film is an excellent live-action  description of the life cycle. . It is highly recommended to accompany any labo- ratory investigations of the life cycle to help students prepare a mental image  and acquire some background information for what they will see in their own  cultures. 
Another excellent trio of films (Haskins. .  1973a  b   1974) on the devel- opment of Echinostelium minutum and Stemonitis flavogenita is also available  on the Internet (https://av.tib.eu/search?q=Haskins). 
Several other time-lapse  videos are available on the YouTube website (www.youtube.com). . Two ex- amples are “Amazing Slime Mold” by francischeefilms (https://www.youtube. . com/watch?v=VJkJbM3y5R4) and “Are You Smarter Than a Slime Mold?” by  It’s Okay to Be Smart (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8HEDqoTPgk). 
Like the plasmodium, it is possible to observe other stages of the myxomy- cete life cycle. . Direct observation of spore germination is an experience most  students will never forget. . In a paper by Keller and Everhart (2010), there is  a detailed description of various techniques for achieving this in a classroom. 
 In this same paper, there is also a review of literature describing other uses of  myxomycetes in teaching and research. . The cells produced from germinating  spores divide, so a significant population of amoeboflagellates can be found on  an agar plate just a few days after spore germination. . Some amoeboflagellates  emerge from spores more quickly than others. .  but spores from Fuligo septica. .  a  large and very common myxomycete often found on mulch in flower gardens. 
  can emerge rather quickly. .  in as little as 60 min (Keller and Everhart. .  2010)   Given additional time, other species can emerge over the course of several  hours, a day, or a few days. 
Myxomycetes also offer the opportunity to examine  fruiting bodies in detail so that older students can have a significant challenge. . There are many lesson plans that can be derived from the observation of  myxomycetes. . For younger students, they provide another focus for their  abounding curiosity, in addition to the means of training children to recog- nize details using simple scientific tools. . What follows is an example of an  activity used in an international school setting in Spain with second graders  400     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology (7-year-olds). . The objective was to explore the history and nature of science as  part of science standards for the age group and was designed by a second-grade  teacher. . It was decided that the second grade would go on an expedition “in  search of myxomycetes.” An expedition provides a wonderful opportunity to  use the scientific method and observation skills. 
 to ask questions. .  and to inves- tigate the environment. 
It allowed the children to experience what it is like to  work as a scientist in the field. . Language arts and math were easily integrated,  as scientists go about measuring, mapping, graphing data, and writing about  their ideas and conclusions. 
The activity involved several stages briefly listed  herein. . Children made a hypothesis by posing a question: Are there any slime molds  at our school? They made a prediction yes or no and drew a bar graph of the  class results. . They wrote a letter to a scientist to find out what was needed to  go on an expedition. .  and a date was set for a visit by the high school science  chair and biologist (who happened to be the third coauthor) to give them more  information. . Lists were made of what would be needed for the day outside, and  letters were sent home informing parents and inviting them to participate. . On  the day of the expedition. .  there were five color-coded sites on campus. 
 and the  children. .  limited to collecting one sample from each area. .  set off in small groups  with hand lenses to search the areas. 
When they found samples, they took them  to the adults for confirmation and boxed them. . In the absence of a myxomycete  fruiting body, they collected samples of dead plant material (e.g., leaves, stems,  and bark) to take back to the classroom in an envelope. . All samples were labeled  with the color code of where they were found. 
The following day, the children  set up moist chamber cultures in plastic dishes and observed them during a 15- min period every week. . There was a continued support from the biology teacher  and a subsequent visit to the science laboratory to see their resulting collections  using binocular stereoscopes. 
The activity was repeated with different groups  over several years, and in total these young children found 17 different species  on the school grounds, a new record for Spain. . It was a successful activity on  many levels, as the children were filled with curiosity and excitement over the  myxomycetes they found and the simplified life cycle that was explained to  them. 
The use of such a small model organism encouraged them to observe very  closely and carefully. . They were keen observers. .  thought nothing of scrambling  beneath bushes or over obstacles to turn over leaf litter in their search. 
 and did  some detailed and precise sketches of what they saw through the stereoscopes. . A focus of interest in any classroom on a nature or science table is a ter- rarium. . The third coauthor has had considerable success with a myxomycete  terrarium. . A large plastic aquarium was set up with a little soil, small pieces  of decaying wood and twigs, mosses, leaf litter, or any other type of plant ma- terial. . Initially, the contents were watered well, and then they were periodi- cally spray-moistened and left near a window but not in direct sunlight. . Many  plasmodia appeared and climbed up the transparent walls of the terrarium. 
 al- lowing students to experience the wonder of their movement. .  their occasional  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    401 disappearance into the plant material in the terrarium. .  and their color. 
Results  included some small white phaneroplasmodia, some greenish veins and fans,  and bright yellow plasmodia, especially if the terrarium had been “primed” with  sclerotia of P. . polycephalum. 
In time   some produced fruiting bodies on twigs. .   dead leaves. .  or the small pieces of decaying wood. 
 delighting the students with  the (usually) overnight appearance of such a different-looking stage in the life  cycle and the fact that the plasmodia “vanished.” The terrarium can be used  as a source of specimens for many activities. .  and naturally supported various  other living organisms as well. 
Mini field collecting could take place within the  classroom. .  since samples can be carefully taken out for examination with the  stereoscope. 
 including smaller fruiting bodies that were invisible to the naked  eye. . Even small plasmodia can be carefully lifted from dead leaves and placed  on thin-layer water agar plates as described later, to observe cell structures and  cyclosis. 
The great discussion that ensues from carefully led questioning. .  either  on work cards beside the terrarium or in class or group discussions. .  is enor- mously valuable and very long-lasting for very little effort. 
An extension to this  tried-and-tested general activity would be to set up several terraria representing  different ecosystems that can be used to generate comparative observations and  discussion on the differences that exist in the substrates present and the different  assemblages of myxomycetes that appear. . Observing Feeding Behavior of Myxomycetes Myxomycetes are members of nature’s clean-up crew. . As “micropredators,”  they feed upon bacteria and fungi that come in contact with the amoeboflagel- lates or the larger feeding form, the plasmodium. . Feeding behavior can there- fore be observed and illustrated with myxomycetes in agar culture. 
A plasmo- dium can be initially maintained at one side of a water agar plate. . To prepare  a water agar, simply dissolve 15–20 g of agar in 1 L of tap or distilled water. 
 This is sterilized by autoclaving and allowed to solidify in Petri dishes. . Alter- natively, water agar can be dispensed and solidified in clean, microwave-safe  plastic containers. 
Suspensions of different species of bacteria, yeasts, or fungal  spores are prepared in sterile distilled water and streaked on the surface of the  agar perpendicular to the growing plasmodium. . Students can observe over a  12–24-h period the plasmodium as it feeds on the different microorganisms. .  The feeding rate can be measured as the time required for the plasmodium to  completely consume its “food” microorganism. . Stained yeast cells can be used  to better show food vacuoles. 
Assessing Ecological Patterns of Myxomycetes Basic ecological concepts can also be applied in the study of myxomycetes. .  A species listing can be generated from any survey of myxomycetes. 
Students  count the number of species and the number of genera. .  and then compute the  402     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology taxonomic diversity expressed as the species:genus (S:G) ratio or the species  richness as the number of species in a given habitat or substrate. . The occurrence  of species can also be expressed as the number of records for a particular spe- cies and expressed based on abundance indices as rare, occasionally occurring,  common, or abundant. . A higher ecological analysis (i.e., alpha or beta species  diversity) can then be generated from these data sets. 
A detailed review on the  different diversity indices used for myxomycetes is reported in another chapter  within this book. . High School and Beyond The activities with myxomycetes discussed previously can be adapted to almost  any age of student; however. 
 high school students enrolled in advanced courses  in preparation for college and undergraduate college students have to adhere  to specific course outlines and expectations. . Most high school biology courses  demand an inquiry approach to learning. .  and aim to introduce students not only  to the principal processes governing living organisms. .  but also to the process  of scientific investigation through laboratory investigation. . In our experience. 
  work with myxomycetes as model organisms has been demonstrated to be suc- cessful in biology classes leading to the US College Board Advanced Placement  (AP). .  United Kingdom Advanced Level Biology (A-level). .  and International  Baccalaureate Higher Level Biology (IB) examinations. 
The last curriculum in- cludes an obligatory Group 4 project that involves a collaborative and interdisci- plinary group activity to which myxomycete studies lend themselves perfectly. .  Some ideas given to students for study projects include a comparison of the  assemblages of myxomycetes associated with different species of plants. 
 myxo- mycetes found on the bark of living trees versus leaf litter. .  the effect of tree age  on the myxomycetes present. 
 the effect of different orientation or height of the  tree bark. .  a comparison of bare bark and bark with various epiphytes (mosses  and lichens) present. 
 the effects of abiotic parameters. .  such as pH. 
 temperature. .   or water availability. .  and many more. 
Some of the topics in which myxomycetes  have been used at the high school level, either as example organisms or for prac- tical activities, are listed in Table 12.2. . However, the possibilities are limited  only by the imaginations of the students and their teachers. . Many of these topics are also suitable for college-level research projects. 
A  comprehensive review of ways to use myxomycetes in education and research  is provided by Keller and Braun (1999). . The authors not only give a list of pos- sible laboratory exercises suitable for study at the high school level but also  many research suggestions for college level and beyond. 
Among other literature  reviews and useful suggestions for studies at these higher levels are those given  by Ashworth and Dee (1975), Ing (1984), and Stephenson (1985). . There have been many doctoral dissertations based on studies of myxomyce- tes. 
Some prominent examples include those by Gray (1938), Wollman (1966),  Keller (1971), and Lado (1984). . More recently. 
 many others have completed  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    403 their PhD studies on the myxomycetes. .  including the first two coauthors (e.g.. 
  dela Cruz. .  2006; Pando. .  1994; Rojas. .  2010; Winsett. 
 2010)  Most research grants  now either require or are favored by the inclusion of an educational component. .  For example, several PhD students are or have been included on the team of sci- entists involved in the Myxotropic project (http://www.myxotropic.org/home)  funded by the Spanish government. 
In addition. .  students from the host countries  have been involved in every collecting trip of this and previous projects. .  and  have been exposed to both instruction in and the practical experience of collect- ing strategies and techniques. 
 recognizing species. .  curation of specimens. 
 and  recording protocols used by the members of team. . This type of outreach has  also been a major focus of US National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded col- lecting expeditions to countries around the world (http://slimemold.uark.edu). .   and has frequently involved formal lectures. .  presentations. .  and workshops to  local students in the host country. . Workshops given by specialists are an important and cost-effective way to  train parataxonomists. 
This training was a major focus of the Planetary Biodi- versity Inventory project based at the University of Arkansas and supported by  the NSF (http://slimemold.uark.edu). .  in which graduate students participated in  collecting trips to localities throughout the world. . Parataxonomists play a very  important role in building the knowledge base on which data sets and analyses  are ultimately based. 
Moreover   although the primary focus of the Planetary  Biodiversity Inventory project was to collect and record myxomycetes and other  eumycetozoans to elucidate their ecology and biogeographical distribution. .  the  project generated excellent educational materials that are still available on the  website listed earlier. . The two editors of the present volume have been respon- sible for a number of myxomycete workshops in regions of the world ranging  from several countries in Central America to Australia. 
 Thailand   Kenya   Na- mibia. .  and Vietnam (Fig. 
12 3)  These workshops have involved several different types of participants. . In some  instances, only students were involved, but other workshops have involved both  students and their teachers, as has been the case at the University of Arkansas  (Fig. . 12 4)  Workshops can be carried out in a laboratory or classroom setting, and  sometimes circumstances (i.e., limited facilities and the time slot available) dictate  that this has to be the case. . However, the educational experience of the students is  considerably enhanced if a field component is possible (Fig. 
12 5)  On two occa- sions (2003 and 2016), a “myxoblitz” has been held in the Great Smoky Mountains  National Park. . The purpose of the “myxoblitz” was to see how many species of  myxomycetes could be recorded from several localities during a period of time  that ranged from a few hours to several days. 
The “myxoblitz” was advertised,  and the only requirement for participating was an interest in doing so. . This type of  activity represents an exceedingly worthwhile way of introducing myxomycetes  to a diverse range of participants of all ages and backgrounds. . The individual who  might never have seen a myxomycete in the field before may have the opportunity  to work alongside a leading authority in the group (Fig. 
12 6)  FIGURE 12.3 Participants preparing moist chamber cultures as part of a workshop in Kenya. . FIGURE 12.4 Myxomycete workshop involving teachers and students held at the University  of Arkansas. . FIGURE 12.5 Fruiting bodies and plasmodium of a myxomycete observed in the field during  a workshop held in northern Thailand. . FIGURE 12.6 Participants in a “myxoblitz” held in the Great Smoky Mountains National  Park. . 406     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology Apart from their use in formal education activities carried out in schools  and universities. .  myxomycetes are important model organisms for education  in a much broader sense. 
 for enjoyment and for conservation. . The more local  groups and communities understand the interdependence of all life. .  especially  organisms. .  such as myxomycetes. .  located at the base of food chains and so vi- tally important in nutrient recycling. 
 the less global problems will deepen. . The  health and resilience of natural habitats are dependent on microorganisms, and  acquiring an appreciation of their vital roles should help to protect them. 
Train- ing local people in areas of the world where information is scarce or lacking. .   and training wardens and resource managers at national parks and forested areas  to recognize and appreciate these essential members of every ecosystem. .  is of  fundamental importance for conservation. 
Another area of education involves groups of amateur enthusiasts who make  up nature societies and clubs all over the world. . They often maintain archives and  curated collections, and generate publications of considerable importance. . Their  work, expeditions (even if local), and meetings have brought about landmark dis- coveries in many areas of science, including in the study of myxomycetes. 
One  such club is the Essex Field Club in the United Kingdom, of which Charles Darwin  and Alfred Russel Wallace were honorary founder members (http://www.essex- fieldclub.org.uk/). . Both Arthur Lister and his daughter Gulielma (Chapter 2) were  active early members of this club and developed a global network of researchers  and enthusiasts with whom they exchanged material and information over a pe- riod of many years. 
Another example of a large association of such clubs that has  greatly increased knowledge and education of myxomycetes is the Fédération My- cologique et Botanique Dauphiné-Savoie (http://fmbds.org/) in France. .  which is  dedicated to raising awareness of mycological and botanical knowledge. . Its annual  international meetings on nivicolous myxomycetes, those species that develop near  the melting snow, are legendary. 
This group also generates publications, such as  the “Bulletin Mycologique et Botanique Dauphiné-Savoie,” and hosts exhibitions,  meetings, and workshops. . Developing Myxomycete Infomaterials for Promoting   Biodiversity Conservation “Charismatic” species of plants and animals often become poster organisms for  informational material directed toward promoting or raising awareness of the  need for biodiversity conservation. . Species that are not so popular with the pub- lic have rarely been used, and this is certainly the case for those that are minute  and invisible to the naked eye. 
However, the intricate fruiting body structures of  myxomycetes when magnified and photographed offer a remarkable “subject”  for postcards, posters, and book covers. . When developed, photo guides can be  used as an informal tool for identifying common species of myxomycetes in  a given park or other locality. . For example, Macabago and dela Cruz (2012)  developed a myxomycete photo guide as a teaching tool in the Philippines. . To  Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    407 prepare this, common species of myxomycetes were chosen from those record- ed in a given study area. 
The specimens were photographed and arranged in a  single PowerPoint slide. . In addition, a scale bar was included for easy reference  to the size of the specimen. . Some basic taxonomic description of the species  was provided directly opposite the photograph on a second PowerPoint slide  such that on a printed card the accompanying information would be directly  behind the image of the species of myxomcyete. . The two slides could be printed  as a single, back-to-back miniposter or postcard, which could be used as a quick  visual guide, as shown earlier in Fig. 
12 2  An interesting visual educational tool to introduce younger children to  myxomycetes was devised by de Haan (2005) as a comic strip. . The adventures  of “Mike the Myxo” (Fig. . 12.7) related much of the life history and character- istics of a myxomycete in the context of an amusing illustrated story that can  be used to raise interest and to teach the main characteristics of the group. . The  fruiting bodies of myxomycetes have been referred to as “miniature works of  art” found in nature, and many artists have been attracted to them. . Some of  the sketches and paintings that these artists have produced reveal the inherent  beauty of the fruiting body. .  and this catches the attention of even the layperson  with no previous exposure to these organisms. 
An example of such a sketch  done by the artist Angela Mele can be seen in Fig. . 12 8  Photographing Myxomycetes At any age, from elementary school to adult, interest in this fascinating group of  organisms can be captured by using images of different stages of their life cycle. .  The methods used to obtain images of the unicellular stages have been briefly dis- cussed in an earlier chapter. . However, the elegant beauty and design of spores, cap- illitium, or even the entire fruiting body of smaller myxomycetes can be achieved  using scanning or transmission electron micrographs. . These images are very costly  and more frequently used in research to resolve complex taxonomic questions and  problems, but they could be used more generally to raise awareness and interest. .  In addition, digital technology can now enable anyone to produce high-quality im- ages (and even video) with relatively simple and inexpensive equipment. 
The small size of the fruiting bodies of most myxomycetes can make photo- graphing them quite challenging. . However, with the acquisition of a few easily  purchased items of equipment and/or the use of several commonly available,  inexpensive items, good images can be obtained. 
Since the fruiting bodies are  immobile, this allows images to be taken without fear of the subject moving. .  Images can easily be taken with a simple digital camera without motion blur,  as long as the substrate and camera are stable (Fig. . 12 9)  A cable release, or  using the camera’s timer, eliminates the possibility of camera movement due to  pressing the shutter button. 
Expensive light-gathering lenses are not necessary,  thus allowing any lens to be used. . Even cell phones can and have been used to  take very good images. . A sturdy tripod is optimal for stability, but anything that  408     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology allows the camera to remain stationary will work. . A backpack makes a satisfac- tory replacement, as does a folded jacket or a sock filled with rice, beans, or  sand. 
A macro lens will allow one to get much closer to the subject, but there are  also other lens attachments that allow closer focusing (Fig. . 12 10)  Images should be taken with the lowest ISO setting to ensure there will be  as little grain (noise) as possible. . The aperture should be set to give the most  satisfactory amount of subject focus. . This setting can be adjusted to obtain re- sults that are the most appealing. . Shutter speed can be increased or decreased to  FIGURE 12.7 “Mike the Myxo” as drawn by Myriam de Haan. 
FIGURE 12.8 Drawing of the myxomycete Collaria arcyrionema as done by the artist Angela  Mele. . FIGURE 12.9 Photographing myxomycetes with a relatively simple digital camera. . 410     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology give the best subject exposure. 
A light source, such as a flash, sunlight, or small  flashlight, can be used to provide additional illumination and emphasis of the  subject. . Samples that are collected, brought back from the field, and worked with  indoors provide even more control of the variables involved in photography,  allowing the opportunity for even better results. . A stereoscope or microscope  with a built-in camera or an adapter to attach a camera or video camera can be  used to capture small details of the myxomycete fruiting body and its structures. .  Moreover, many of today’s digital cameras can synchronize with the Internet,  allowing easy and rapid sharing of images with others. 
CONCLUSIONS The potential for using myxomycetes in education is enormous. . As a safe, non- toxic, hypoallergenic living organism, its place in the classroom of even the  very young student is virtually unrivaled. 
The myxomycete as an example of a  true microorganism that is sometimes visible to the naked eye. .  with observable  cyclosis. 
 feeding behavior. .  a complex life cycle consisting of several stages. .   and a model of synchronous mitosis. .  is unique. 
The relative ease of laboratory  culture in large quantities of some members of this group makes it an ideal can- didate for many higher research possibilities as discussed herein and in earlier  chapters. . The sheer beauty and elegance of some myxomycete fruiting bod- ies make them a natural focus of interest and wonder. .  and their indisputable  FIGURE 12.10 Randy Darrah using a more sophisticated camera to photograph a myxo- mycete. . Myxomycetes in Education  Chapter | 12    411 importance in the correct functioning of ecosystems only underlines the need  to teach with them and about them whenever possible. 
Some of the educational  opportunities afforded by these characteristics, particularly those used by the  coauthors, have been described in this chapter. . It is not intended to be more than  an example of our experiences and of the didactic potential to encourage other  educators to consider the advantages of using these organisms. . We have also  given examples of literature pertaining to educational uses, but it is in no way  intended to be an exclusive list, and there are probably many other examples of  which we are unaware. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Mrs. . Susan Allen of the American School of Madrid, Spain, who de- signed and carried out the second-grade project described herein. 
Appreciation is extended to  Myriam de Haan for allowing us to include an image of “Mike the Myxo” and to Angela Mele  for our use of one of her sketches of myxomycetes. . Gratitude is expressed to Randy Darrah  for providing the information on photography included herein. . REFERENCES Ashworth, J., Dee, J., 1975. . The Biology of Slime Molds. 
In: Arnold, E. . (Ed.), Institute of Biology’s  Studies in Biology. . London  de Haan, M., 2005. 
The Adventures of Mike the Myxo. . Royal Antwerp Mycological Society, Ant- werp, Belgium, English translation aided by Henry Beker. 
 dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2006. . Marine Dendryphiella species from different geographical locations: an  integrated, polyphasic approach to its taxonomy and physioecology. 
Dissertation, Technical  University, Braunschweig, Germany, 195 p. . dela Cruz, T.E., Pangilinan, M.V., Litao, R.A., 2012. . Printed identification key or web-based iden- tification guide: an effective tool for species identification? J. . Microbiol  Biol  Educ  13, 180– 182. .  Gray, W.D., 1938. 
The effect of light on the fruiting of myxomycetes. . Am  J  Bot  25, 511–522. .  Haskins, E.F., 1973a. 
Echinostelium minutum (Myxomycetes). . Amoebal Phase. 
Encyclopaedia  Cinematographica. . Film E 1816 des Institut für den Wissenschaftlichen Film. . University of  Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. .  Haskins, E.F., 1973b. 
Echinostelium minutum (Myxomycetes). . Plasmodial Phase (Protoplasmo- dium). 
Encyclopaedia Cinematographica. . Film E 1817 des Institut für den Wissenschaftlichen  Film. . University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. .  Haskins, E.F., 1974. 
Stemonitis flavogenita (Myxomycetes)—Plasmodial Phase (Protoplasmodi- um). . Encyclopaedia Cinematographica. . Film E 2000 des Institut für den Wissenschaftlichen  Film. . University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. .  Haskins, E.F., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. 
Methods of agar culture of myxomycetes: an overview. .  Rev  Mex  Micol  27, 1–7   Ing, B., 1984. . Myxomycetes in biology teaching. . J  Biol  Educ  18, 277–285. .  Keller, H.W., 1971. . The genus Perichaena: a taxonomic and cultural study. 
PhD thesis, University  of Iowa, Iowa City. . Keller, H.W., Braun, K.L., 1999. 
Myxomycetes of Ohio: their systematics, biology, and use in  teaching. . Ohio Biological Survey Bulletin XIII NS, Columbus, OH. . 412     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., 2010. . The importance of myxomycetes in biological research and  teaching. . Fungi 3, 13–27. .  Koevenig, J.L., Alexopoulos, C.J., Martin, G.W., Porter, T.R., 1961. . Slime Molds. . Iowa City: State  University of Iowa. 
8 p  Slime Molds I: Life Cycle. . U-5518  Slime Molds II: Collection, Culti- vation, and Use. . U-5519  Slime Molds III: Identification. . U-5520  Lado, C., 1984. 
Estudio taxonómico, florístico y corológico de la clase myxomycetes en las pro- vincias de Ávila, Madrid y Segovia (España peninsular). . PhD thesis, Universidad de Alcalá de  Henares. . Macabago, S.A.B., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2012. 
Development of a myxomycete photoguide as a teach- ing tool for microbial taxonomy. . J  Microbiol  Biol  Educ  13, 67–69   Martin, G.W., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1969. . The Myxomycetes. 
University of Iowa Press, Iowa City. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1993. 
Die Myxomyceten Deutschlands und des angren- zenden Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs. . Band 1: Ceratiomyzales,  Echinosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. 
Karlheinz Baumann Verlag, Gomaringen, Germany. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1995. . Die Myxomyceten Deutschlands und des angren- zenden Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs. 
Band 2: Physarales. . Karl- heinz Baumann Verlag, Gomaringen, Germany. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 2000. . Die Myxomyceten Deutschlands und des angren- zenden Alpenraumes unter besonderer Berücksichtigung Österreichs. 
Band 3: Stemonitales. .  Karlheinz Baumann Verlag, Gomaringen, Germany. .  Pando, F., 1994. 
Estudio de los mixomicetes corticícolas de la España peninsular e islas Baleares. .  PhD thesis, Universidad Complutense de Madrid. . Poulain, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. 
Les Myxomycètes. . 2 vols  Fédération mycologique et  botanique Dauphiné-Savoie, Sevrier, France. . Rojas, C.A., 2010. . Biogeography and microhabitat distribution of myxomycetes in high-elevation  areas of the Neotropics. 
PhD thesis, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR. . Stephenson, S.L., 1985. 
Slime molds in the laboratory II: moist chamber cultures. . Am  Biol  Teach   47, 487–489. .  Stephenson, S.L., Stempen, H., 1994. . Myxomycetes: A Handbook of Slime Molds. 
Timber Press,  Portland, OR. .  Winsett, K., 2010. 
Intraspecific variation in two cosmopolitan species of myxomycetes, Didymium  squamulosum and Didymium difforme (Physarales: Didymiaceae). . PhD dissertation, University  of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR. . Wollman, C., 1966. . Laboratory culture of selected species of myxomycetes with special reference  to the gross morphology of their plasmodia. 
PhD dissertation, University of Texas, Austin, TX. . FURTHER READING Farr, M.L., 1981. . How to Know the True Slime Molds. . Picture Key Nature Series. 
William C   Brown Co., Dubuque, IA. .  Gray, W.D., Alexopoulos, C.J., 1968. . Biology of Myxomycetes. 
Ronald Press, New York, NY. .  413 Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology. . http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-805089-7.00013-5 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. . All rights reserved. . Chapter 13 Myxomycetes in the 21st  Century Carlos Rojas*. 
 Tetiana Kryvomaz** *Engineering Research Institute. .  University of Costa Rica. .  San Pedro de Montes de Oca. .   Costa Rica; **Kyiv National Construction and Architecture University. 
 Kyiv   Ukraine CONNECTION WITH THE WORLD The myxomycetes have been formally studied since the middle part of the 17th  century (Stephenson et al.. .  2008)  Although the biology of the group has not  been documented to the extent that is the case for most groups of vertebrates and  plants. 
 there is a good baseline of information relating to the fruiting body stage  of myxomycetes. . As noted in other chapters of this volume, this is more easily  observed for taxonomic and basic ecological aspects. . However   the communi- cation of the accumulated information on myxomycetes has been conducted  primarily through formal scientific and academic channels. .  such as articles. .   volumes   scientific notes. 
 and university courses. . In fact, there is a good chance  that most of the readers of this volume first learned about myxomycetes directly  from any of these strategies of knowledge transmission. . Recently   with the establishment of the Internet as the most important plat- form for global communication (Gubbia et al.. .  2013)   there has been a fantastic  development of high quality websites. .  blogs   social media platforms. 
 and mobile   apps for different groups of living organisms. . This natural expansion of the  technology-based modern lifestyle to the scientific world has created new paths  for scientific communication and has changed the way our societies transfer  knowledge (Cummings and Teng. .  2003)  Some authors have even stated that the  Internet has modified the neurobiological and cognitive pathways of the human  learning process (Roth and Dicke, 2005). . These changes have permeated sci- ence and allowed for a rapid growth of nonscientists performing basic scientific  assessments. . For instance. .  the more prominent role of citizen science projects. 
  most of which are based on emotional connections with nature promoted by  multiscale information transfer. .  is highly relevant in the current structure of  scientific research (Boney et al.. 
 2014)  414     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology In this modern context. 
 it is understandable that effective communication  seems to be a partial function of the popularity-based commercial background  associated with most of the “free Internet” available to the public at large. .  since  companies rapidly recognized the power of such a communication channel. 
 In this manner, the more individuals promoting a specific topic, usually due  to its commercial value, the more likely that such a topic would survive for  longer on the Internet. . We all have seen examples of the latter in the form of  straightforward, short, “viral” pieces of information. . Scholars have documented  that most individuals do not remain focused on one webpage when “surfing the  Internet” for longer than 10–20 s. .  unless they find something interesting (Gong  et al.. 
 2012)   and this pattern has modified the way messages are communicated. .  However   just how easy is it to create such effective messages with informa- tion on living organisms? The average person is already very much aware of  many different kinds of macroorganisms. .  ranging from trees to household pets. 
 What about microorganisms to which most individuals cannot relate? Most aca- demic communication strategists are still debating on the effectiveness of the  different styles of scientific literacy approaches (MacDermott and Hand. .  2015)   However, there is a large consensus on the fact that Internet-based strategies  should be a key element in any type of communication plan that is developed. .  That does not imply that communication should only take place in this platform  because written works and classical human interaction would always be impera- tive (Raber and Richter. .  2008)   but it demonstrates that the Internet should be  present in the desired plan of communication. . Nevertheless, it is important to  keep in mind that modern online-based communication is designed in short,  straightforward, highly stimulating pieces. . In this sense. 
 myxomycetes have  the advantage of forming beautiful fruiting bodies that when photographed or  recorded with special techniques can communicate strong biophilic messages  about the microscopic world around us. . The coauthors of this volume and myxomycete specialists worldwide have  used their own ways to transfer accumulated knowledge in spite of their own  limitations in the field of human communications. 
That is simply one of the  shortcomings of the academic training in science. . Despite that, some have even  developed websites and online resources devoted to the myxomycetes and the  dissemination of information around and beyond their scientific projects. . In fact,  most of the myxomycete specialists worldwide at some point in their lives have  become teachers, either in formal academic venues or in informal ones. 
Also    the present volume was developed as an effort to maintain the natural process  of communicating condensed information on a group of microorganisms for  which a comprehensive text had not been published for almost a half century. .  What all this means is that very likely there has never been any point in history  when such an active attempt to communicate information on myxomycetes has  existed as at present. 
However   it is the responsibility of all science communi- cators. .  teachers   naturalists. 
 and myxomycete professionals to understand that  integrated messages are also much more effective than simple monothematic  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    415 ones (Thorson and Moore. .  1996)  In this manner. .  it is not the same to provide  a message on the taxonomy of myxomycetes. 
 whether it is classical or molec- ular-based. .  by itself as opposed to integrating such a message in the context of  technique development. .  the relevance of scientific consensus through debate. .   and why   in the end. 
 for a nonscientist. .  taxonomy and myxomycetes ultimately  matter as well. . A relevant point to consider in this discussion is that myxomycetes are an  excellent gateway for individuals to enter the world of microscopic organisms  (Keller and Everhart, 2010). . The fruiting bodies of many species are simply  beautiful, their life history intriguing, and their potential still understudied. 
 Since research is driven by curiosity. .  these organisms are fantastic for integrat- ing such elements of scholarly dissemination of information along with modern  multilevel (i.e.. 
 political. .  social   and ecological) trends. 
During the past few decades, myxomycete specialists, as well as many other  biologists specializing in various other taxonomic groups, have faced a common  problem. . The number of individuals, particularly students, interested in classi- cal aspects of biology has decreased, or at least that seems to be the general con- sensus. . The traditional strategy to counterbalance such a phenomenon has been  to reach out and develop different types of workshops, hands-on activities, and  field-based forays. . The latter has resulted in an increasing number of “amateur”  groups of individuals, some of whom possess very specialized knowledge of  taxonomic aspects of the more prominent groups of organisms. . However, this  trend is highly dependent on many socioeconomic variables that allow individu- als in different regions of the world to show those levels of organization. 
In this  manner. .  the relevant question is how efforts can be socioeconomically balanced  out when most of the world does not have the much-needed. .  respective special- ists or communication facilitators to “plant the seed” and mobilize such initia- tives in the first place? This core issue seems to be a good stage for integrated  global communication approaches. .  such as online courses and video-based on- line strategies. 
However   for a section of the world where the Internet is a simple  fact of life. .  it is hard to remember that there is still a large section of the human  population for which these strategies are technologically limited. . These are the  cases in which classical approaches still matter and the reason why educators  should not give up on using traditional techniques. 
As we have argued, the bio- philic relationships that some individuals can establish with organisms, such as  the myxomycetes, may be relevant in the process of communication. . Along with the problems associated with communication channels, language  barriers can impose an obstacle to the strategies of communication used to dis- seminate information on myxomycetes. 
As is the case for most groups of living  organisms, English is the language most often used for scientific publications. .  Even though some popular works and several scientific works on myxomycetes  have also been published in other languages, most of the important literature on  myxomycetes is still in English. . This shortcoming implies that local research- ers in different parts of the world also have some responsibility in translating  416     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology and communicating the mainstream information on myxomycetes in their local  languages. . Only with a multilanguage effort effective communication can be  reached at larger geographical scales. 
In this regard, noteworthy achievements  are represented in the works of Neubert et al. . (1993, 1995, 2000), Hagiwara and  Yamamoto (1995), Lado and Pando (1997), Poulain et al. . (2011)   and others. 
  which in addition to being based on many decades of field research on myxomy- cetes. .  have attempted to communicate myxomycete information in languages  other than English for regional populations of readers. 
Despite the different strategies of message communication. .  it seems that  the most effective way to transfer information is with mixed approaches  (Jewitt. 
 2012) coming from committed groups of individuals. .  specialists or not. 
  and directed toward one group of organisms. . In this sense. 
 citizen-science ap- proaches could be an effective way to develop complex networks to share infor- mation on myxomycetes. .  given their multiple characteristics for biophilia-based  (Wilson. .  1984) integration with several aspects of the human lifestyle (i.e.. 
 they  are simply beautiful and we want them around). . After all, myxomycetes can  be observed and detected in the field by amateurs and specialists, and basic  training could be accomplished with committed individuals at a comparatively  low cost. 
Such strategies should be one of the relevant topics of conversation  in professional meetings and nonacademic forums for common strategies and  consensus to be reached. . This is the way to capture the attention of groups of  policy makers who can match the scientific and popular developments relat- ing to one group of organisms. 
 such as the myxomycetes. .  with integrated ap- proaches to manage nature that would consider other microorganisms. 
 as well   In this end, when popular pressure exists toward the conservation of biological  resources, particularly in social media, political groups seem to respond. . The  latter has effectively worked for common global issues. .  such as climate change  and management of natural resources. .  and it has been effective for NGO-based  efforts directed toward flagship species. 
However   there is still much work to  do to make individuals understand that nonvisible microorganisms that may not  have the marketing capability of larger organisms do perform an important role  and even have a high value for the dynamics of biological systems. . In fact, there  is still much work to do to make the public generate hedonic relationships with  noneconomically important organisms. . After all, not everything has to have a  visible value. 
In this sense, outside of classrooms and laboratories not much is known  about myxomycetes. . Despite this, individual efforts from professionals, natu- ralists, academic groups, and organized individuals have still attracted attention  toward myxomycetes. . Their aesthetic beauty has been an aspect of fascination  for the nonspecialized public and several volumes on groups historically linked  with myxomycetes have been illustrated with images of these organisms. 
As an  example, Fig. . 13.1 shows the alternative option for the cover of the present vol- ume and demonstrates the beauty and versatility of myxomycete images. .  as well  as their associated biophilic message with respect to the world of microscopic  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    417 FIGURE 13.1 Alternative cover volume design evaluated for the present volume. . The image  corresponds to a Diderma miniatum collected by Dr. . Carlos Lado in Peru and photographed by  Carlos de Mier in the Royal Botanical Gardens of Madrid, Spain. . 418     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology organisms. 
There is no doubt that nonspecialized eyes seeing such an image  (or the selected cover of this volume) would still find it appealing and interesting. . However, when talking to a layperson about locally known plants or ani- mals, it is still much easier to relate to what they already know than with such  cryptic topics as microorganisms. . In fact, personal accumulated knowledge on  microscopic organisms is likely very low for most the world population. 
This is  ironic. .  since microbial systems are essential for the existence of specific ecosys- tems (Pointing and Belnap. .  2012)   commercial products (Velivelli et al.. .  2014)    and lifestyles (Kramer et al.. 
 2013)  For example, myxomycetes have been  recently reported to absorb heavy metals (Rea-Maminta et al., 2015) and thus  have been proposed as bioremediators, but most individuals ignore this infor- mation. . The widespread low level of microbial literacy is a constraint for the  true integrated development of applied strategies. .  and in developing countries  the valuation of microbial-based ecosystem services seems to be a black box  still waiting for attention. . We are not proposing a commercially based approach  to address myxomycetes since their real value. 
 as with several other groups of  organisms on the planet. .  may simply be related to their very existence. . How- ever, such an applied field of knowledge is still in a very basic stage. 
Such a constraint has been detected by both economists and biologists and  even though some individuals would not agree on a quantified economic strat- egy based on the concept of natural capital. .  this concept has allowed economic  theory to enrich the models used by natural science and particularly conserva- tion specialists. 
In this way. .  biological systems are conceptualized as organi- zations of sinks. .  sources   and flows or quantifiable energy that permit human  social systems to utilize both goods and services from nature. . Of course, the key  element is the maximization of the human-nature interaction in terms of sus- tainability and intelligent, responsible use of resources. 
However   how accurate  such models can be in systems where microbial ecosystem functions are poorly  documented? What about myxomycetes. .  whose trophic stages are extremely  poorly studied (Chapter 9)? To cope with such limitations. 
 the elaboration of  interesting ideas for human development toward balancing conservation and  utilization or resources has been an active task of policy makers in the past few  decades. . For instance. 
 the economic strategy for more equal development known as  the triple helix (Leydesdorff. .  2013)   which calls for three sectors of society— academia. 
 government and industry—to be engines of development has gained  recent popularity in some countries. . Most developed countries in the northern  hemisphere have understood such a concept for decades and even though the  system has weakened due to globalization and free-market dynamics. .  it still  somehow works in these areas. 
The problem in developing regions is that the  lack of long-term political. .  economic   and social stability has not permitted a  true development of academy-based research. 
 social outreach. .  and scientific  empowerment in political spheres. . In these areas, more than in developed  countries, private industries are disconnected with universities and local  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    419 governments. . The latter are expected to perform an auditing role on the for- mer while universities are expected to do the same on both governments and  industries. 
Of course   the true development of a scientific path moves forward more  rapidly when teams of organized individuals. .  independent of their origin and  approaches. .  share common interests and work together toward achieving a goal. .  The accumulation of information presented in this volume is an example of the  latter. 
 since during the last 50 years or so. .  many individuals from different parts  of the world have permitted the fastest rate of accumulation ever documented. 
 However   as mentioned before. .  such a community of active researchers and  individuals interested in myxomycetes still lacks the political leverage to intro- duce this taxonomic group of microorganisms in agendas outside the scientific  environment. . This is not surprising, taking into consideration that a larger and  much more involved group of organisms in human development, such as the  fungi, are also ignored for the most part. . In this sense, it is imperative for ev- erybody dealing with myxomycetes to use as many communication channels as  possible and incorporate the group into as many different agendas as possible. 
 For a true integrated strategy of natural resources management. .  sustainability  and economic development. 
 it is necessary to understand that microbial com- munities perform a unique role on the earth and that even though undocumented  roles such as the ones performed by myxomycetes do exist. .  that does not imply  that those organisms lack importance for ecosystem functioning. . RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES Most of the research directed toward myxomycetes has been carried out in uni- versities and research centers associated with academic institutions. 
However    extremely valuable input has been provided for a number of years by individuals  who have not been affiliated with academia and yet have devoted their time to  collecting. .  identifying. 
 and understanding myxomycete relationships with the  environment. . Over time, very important contributions have been provided by  both groups, and most myxomycete collections contain several records from  both, as well. . In this sense, it is important to acknowledge the role of nonaca- demically affiliated myxomycete researchers for the construction of hypotheses  and generation of information about the group. 
The modern constraint associated with the prominent role of researchers  who are not affiliated with academic institutions is that they usually cannot ap- ply for public funds and thus are limited to generating smaller scale datasets;  they are more inclined to continue their research within a specific field of action  (i.e.. .  taxonomy) and they are usually not encouraged to train younger research- ers. . This is particularly relevant in areas of the world where myxomycete re- search is absent or slow since the process of generational change would reach  only those younger researchers geographically close to these potential mentors. .  In contrast. .  when researchers from academic institutions obtain funds. 
 usually  420     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology through a network of collaborators. .  some money can be invested in training  newer generations of researchers from different parts of the world and in con- necting several disciplines outside the biological sciences. . Given the reduced  number of funding opportunities in the current global context. 
 most academic  myxomycete researchers tend to form strong international networks that ex- tend by default their scale of action and influence. . One of the most prominent  examples of the latter has taken place in the past decade at the University of  Arkansas in the United States. .  where a generation of researchers from North  and South America. .  Africa   Southeast Asia. .  and Europe has been completely  or partially trained. . In this sense, the role of academically affiliated researchers  may be more important for developing standard methodologies and continuing  the existence of international networks. 
Either way, all valuable inputs for the  generation of myxomycete information should be recognized, understanding  the limitations of contextual elements. . What is interesting in the historical development of the generation of in- formation on myxomycetes is that the internationalization of research seems  to have been present for a long time. . As has been the case for many groups of  living organisms. 
 the first documented processes of myxomycete study took  place in Europe and rapidly transferred to North America (Lado and Wrigley  de Basanta. .  2008)  After that, both European and American researchers started  carrying projects in areas of the world that had been undocumented at the time;  these included Africa and Latin America. . Later, the Far East, particularly Japan,  became an important source of information on myxomycetes and more recently,  individuals in Southeast Asia have activated research in that part of the world. 
 At this point. .  most of the ecological systems on Earth have been documented in  one way or another and even though there are still geographical gaps to fill in. .   there is a “good” idea of the distribution of myxomycetes. .  based on the occur- rence of fruiting bodies throughout the world (Fig. . 13 2)  The internationalization of myxomycete research has taken a different shape  in the last decades and turned into a collaborative effort directed toward the goal  of understanding the phylogenetic position and molecular relationships among  groups within the myxomycetes. 
This has been very important for the develop- ment of new hypotheses relating to the group but has created a modern tech- nological and infrastructural gap between researchers based in developed and  developing areas of the world. . Since this phenomenon does not apply only to  myxomycetes but to many other groups of organisms. .  some governments have  created legislation to protect their own intracellular diversity. 
 the potential use  of the information contained at that level. .  and the intellectual property rights of  local researchers. . Developing countries have been particularly active in regulating “access  to biodiversity.” This is a concept understood in an international legal frame- work as “access to biochemical. 
 molecular. .  and genetic information. . ” based  on claiming moral rights associated with geographical location. 
The Nagoya  protocol, sponsored by the Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP, 2011),  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    421 which started in 2014, is one example of the latter. . Up to now   this protocol has  been signed by over 80 countries in the world. 
 mainly in Latin America. .  Africa    Europe   Australia. .  and the Asian continent. .  and it has created a legal framework  for the sharing of economic benefits product of bioprospecting and marketing  of biodiversity. 
The issue observed by some individuals (Richerzhagen. .  2014)  is that this protocol also limits the capacity of foreign researchers to operate  projects in signatory countries. .  since it does establish that local counterparts  should be part of the project. 
Modern myxomycete research should take place in this specific environ- ment, which differs dramatically from the setting of any other time in history. .  Only a few years ago, the regulatory framework for biological research, particu- larly examples focusing on the generation of molecular information, was more  loosely established in most countries. 
However   even for basic routine tasks. .   such as movement of collections from one country to another. .  most internal  regulations establish the signing of bi- or multiparty research agreements. .  mate- rial transfer agreements. 
 and the previous signing of informed consents between  FIGURE 13.2 Myxomycetes have been studied since the middle of the 17th century. .  but most  of the records included in the GBIF platform (A; www.gbif.org) were collected in the 1901–2000  period. . During the most recent years, there has been a decline in the number of records in GBIF (B)  even though the research activity has not declined. 
The distribution of genera, such as Physarum  (C), clearly shows a cosmopolitan range even though several species, such as P. . echinosporum  (Chapter 8), have limited distribution (www.discoverlife.org). 
422     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology researchers and the owners, public or private, of the areas where research has  taken place. . The reality is that, in a similar manner to other types of research- ers for other groups or organisms, most myxomycete scientists operate behind  legal operative international regulations. . This is one aspect that obviously must  change in the development of research projects on myxomycetes worldwide. 
  not only for moral reasons. .  but more importantly because the limited funding  agencies that can still provide grants for myxomycete research have already  complied. .  or will likely do so. 
 with such international guidelines. . However,  it is important to critically analyze the role of such international agreements  in terms of hindering or promoting research in the first place. 
In this manner. .   the responsibility of the younger generations of myxomycete researchers is to  understand the current stage of international research to practice and transmit  to their students/apprentices good practices for the implementation of interna- tional team–based research and the development of critical thinking skills. . In addition to such legal international limitations, one aspect that has been  prominent in the history of myxomycete research is the classical monothematic  approach taken by most researchers. . There are limited numbers of scientific arti- cles and notes on myxomycete research from any other perspective than the bio- logical one. . With the notable exception of some modern investigators who have  developed applied research using myxomycetes in the fields of civil engineer- ing. .  computer sciences. 
 medicine   pharmacy   and alternative energy strategies. .   there are limited historical examples of myxomycete applications. . This volume  contains a complete chapter (Chapter 11) devoted to such topics. 
 but alternative  approaches on myxomycetes are traditionally not considered by most researchers  due to their classical biological background. . In this sense. 
 there is a whole field  of work for the future in these directions if different groups of individuals receive  information on myxomycetes and learn about their fascinating life cycles. .  sys- tem relationships. .  and potential for various applications. . At least for some parts  of the world. 
 the basic surveying and accumulated knowledge on the myxomy- cete biota present within political or natural boundaries already exists. .  and more  applied projects for human development using myxomycetes could be designed. 
 Even though this is not the case for most of the world. .  given the technological  gaps between developed and developing countries already discussed. .  the latter  research path may represent an alternative for some groups of researchers based  in developing countries and for multidisciplinary approaches to be executed in  these areas. . It is important to mention that all or most of the currently integrated  ecological methodologies can be applied to the study of myxomycetes. 
However, the development of intraacademic merging and collaboration  should be promoted in the first place for this type of proposal to be maturely  designed and academically supported. . The reality is that within academic  institutions. .  particularly those of a comparatively large size. 
 most scholars are  disconnected from the research efforts of other individuals within the same  institution. . Similarly   it is very hard for most individuals to keep up with sci- entific developments with all of the multiangled social stimulation provided by  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    423 the modern lifestyle. . It would be very difficult to produce a general communi- cation channel that could keep individuals interested in myxomycetes for long  periods of time. .  but it is probably not so difficult to generate such channels for  specific social subgroups. . In this sense. 
 a multidisciplinary approach integrat- ing specialists in other disciplines of human knowledge could help the more  classical myxomycete scientists disseminate their work in more creative and  effective ways. . Whether or not such a strategy could create a local “snowball”  effect would be determined by the context. 
 but most myxomycete specialists. .   academic or not. .  are recognized in their particular workplace. .  regardless of the  general interest that other colleagues may have on myxomycetes. 
Whatever strategies for the development of future research lines may be gen- erated. .  in the modern context myxomycete specialists have recently been and  will likely continue to reach out to colleagues in other disciplines to design more  creative projects as well. . This type of skill for a multidisciplinary approach is  important to transmit to the younger generation of myxomycete specialists. .  in a  manner that would give equal importance to the transfer of knowledge at both the  information and the disciplinary formation level. 
For a group of organisms. .  such  as the myxomycetes. .  which will likely continue attracting much less attention  than their vertebrate or botanical counterparts. 
 it is imperative to provide a much  more integrated conceptual framework for research to take place. . For example. 
  it may be very attractive for younger researchers to begin using modern tech- niques to generate data and produce popular articles in spite the fact that there  are still many basic questions on myxomycetes that have not been answered. . In  this way, a balance between the two fields of action is necessary, since the key  to biological comprehensiveness is the integration of results through theoretical  elements. . In the end. 
 science is the activity responsible for the identification of  patterns in nature. .  and this can be substantiated only from many different angles  when researchers work from several different perspectives. . In this sense. 
 it is important to understand that the advancements. .  both theo- retical and experimental. .  generated for a group of organisms are a byproduct of  the intensity and effort of work over time. . Since myxomycetes have not been  studied with the intensity of other groups of organisms. 
 there are still several basic  questions to address. .  and there are still many possibilities to readdress questions  with modern techniques and higher resolution datasets. 
 particularly with the ex- tremely understudied tropic stages. . This is currently an active approach in the  taxonomic and phylogenetic areas of myxomycete research, but it could easily  be applied to ecological and biogeographical fields, for example. . For some very  well studied parts of the world, perhaps this approach is the next logical step. . The effective execution of myxomycete research projects depends heavily  upon two main aspects: namely, human expertise and infrastructural/equipment  capabilities. 
We have addressed the fact that a large gap between developed and  developing areas may exist due to intrinsic modern characteristics of both areas. .  However   for those developing regions. .  countries. .  for example. 
 that may lack a  high level of human expertise on myxomycetes. .  it is crucial for researchers to  424     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology develop plans for the improvement of conditions and learn from the lessons of  colleagues. . It is understandable that not all developing regions have the same  capacities, but there are always opportunities to address issues and improve  research conditions. . This does not mean that everybody should carry out the  same tasks or do the same work in different geographical regions. .  and points  more toward understanding in which directions the local capability may grow  and improve and which directions may not be feasible for future growth. 
For the  latter, it is the establishment of relationships with other complementary groups  that could determine the success of the global research endeavors. . In either case, one aspect that is important to remember is that, due to the  modern constraints of the research environments, most individual efforts should  become local team strategies. . Contrary to past research, the modern paradigm of  research calls for teams rather than for individuals. . In this sense, research net- works are essential, and whether they are national or regional, they are very impor- tant. 
However, local-based teams, within the institutions or the organized groups  where the effort to study myxomycetes arise, are a key element for the execution  of modern comprehensive projects. . These teams not only provide an increased  effort to generate more robust datasets but an internal leverage that can boost the  support to the research initiatives. . In this sense. 
 some scholars have pointed out  that the formation of a critical intellectual mass on one topic of human knowledge  is a key for the correct implementation of plans and ideas (Guest. .  1997)  When  this is implemented at the local level, it may provide the necessary boost for the  lead local researchers to move on with their plans for research. 
An example of the latter is the well-documented advancement of techniques  and protocols for molecular analyses of myxomycetes. . Only 2 decades ago,  when other living organisms already had baseline work in place, most of the  work on myxomycetes was in a very early stage of development. . However   the  modern trend to look at molecular data for different types of biological analy- ses created a need to move research in that direction. 
 fostered teams to work  together and helped these individuals generate the much-needed ground work  that determined the protocols used today. . Even though this field of action is still  ongoing and new developments are generated every year by different teams of  researchers. 
 it took a longer time for myxomycetes to be documented at a level  equivalent to the levels of many other groups of organisms. . These types of tech- nical challenges, better addressed in other chapters of this volume, have created  important limitations for the generation of information on the group. . Moreover,  as already mentioned, it has also indicated that more applied lines of investiga- tion are still in very early stages of implementation. 
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT Most areas in the world have not yet been well documented with respect to  the diversity of myxomycetes (as represented by fruiting bodies) present. .  the  functional diversity of the group is still understudied. .  and survey efforts are  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    425 currently not normalized using appropriate standards. . In this situation, it is  very hard to determine the management status of the different species or groups  within the myxomycetes and thus design appropriate methods for their manage- ment. . In recent years, there have been initiatives to create groups of researchers  that can propose guidelines for the management and conservation of myxo- mycetes. 
An innovative example was the effort of Schnittler et al. . (2011), who  put together a red list analysis using a threat and conservation approach for  German myxomycetes. 
In this work. .  the authors tried to cover the dissemination  of knowledge about myxomycete ecology and natural history in Germany. .  they  compiled a checklist of myxomycetes for that country. .  and attempted to assess  multiorigin threats to the existence of the group. 
However   the current baseline  information associated with most biological systems in the world is so basic that  it seems impossible to accomplish a similar task for most other regions at the  present time. . When only the biodiversity aspect is considered. .  it is still hard to  determine for most species of myxomycete whether they are becoming rare. .  are  simply uncommon or are strongly associated with specific biological systems  (or geographical zones) and thus not present in most others. . Although some species of myxomycete are currently included in several  regional Red Lists. 
 there are several methodological and terminological prob- lems in the evaluation of their conservation status with respect to IUCN criteria  (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources). . The  IUCN Red List criteria assign species to categories of extinction risk, using  quantitative rules based on population sizes, population decline rates, range  areas, and range declines. . The IUCN quantitative analyses estimate the extinc- tion probability of a taxon based on its known life history, habitat requirements,  threats, and any specified management options. 
The analysis of population  viability is an example of such approach, and it is expected that quantitative  analyses make full use of all relevant available data. . In a situation in which  there is limited information, whatever data are available can be used to provide  an estimate of extinction risk. . However   the application of the IUCN criteria to  myxomycetes in fact generates more questions that the actual applicability of  the current methodology. 
 due to the life history and characteristics of the group. .  For example. 
 how is an “individual” defined for myxomycetes? Can changes in  population size be assessed in myxomycetes? How can population growth rates  be determined for myxomycetes? What is a “population” in myxomycetes? Is it  possible to determine the dispersal ability of species within the group? What is  “endemic” and “rare” for myxomycetes? As we can observe. .  it is not easy to identify what constitutes an “individual  organism” for myxomycetes because their life cycle includes partially docu- mented life cycles. 
 one reproductive stage and two vegetative ones. .  several  morphologies at all different levels and limited documentation of population- based parameters. . Should single fruiting bodies or groups of crowded fruit- ing bodies be counted as one individual? Despite the obvious constraints of  such methodology. .  IUCN approaches require practical protocols as well. 
Also    426     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology spores. .  plasmodia (except perhaps for protoplasmodia and those that give rise  to aethalia and pseudoaethalia). .  and amoeboflagellates provide evidence of the  occurrence of myxomycetes in a specific microsite or locality. 
 but they cannot  be counted as individuals. . There is no feasible way of assessing either the ab- solute or relative abundance of each of these stages in myxomycetes, even on a  limited spatial scale. . The absence of such data makes it impossible to evaluate  population sizes following IUCN criteria (Kryvomaz and Stephenson, 2016). 
Moreover, appreciable changes in species composition, overall abundance,  and diversity are observed for myxomycetes from 1 year to the next at the lo- cality level. . In theory   it might well be possible to assess changes in at least  some microhabitats (e.g.. .  soil) with the use of direct environmental sampling  with some of the molecular techniques now in use. 
 but such sampling would  be limited to relatively small microsites. .  and it is highly questionable that these  would be of any value in assessing population changes for the entire habitat. 
 A population, as defined by IUCN, is the total number of mature individuals  of the taxon. . It is the fundamental basis for the determination of the critically  endangered (CR), endangered (EN), or vulnerable (VU) categories. . Such deter- mination is performed by calculating the reduction in population size in the past  and predicting what the size of the group of individuals will be in the future. 
 However, quantitative studies of myxomycetes have not yet produced data of  this type. . Records of myxomycetes are based almost exclusively upon fruiting  bodies collected in nature or recovered in moist chamber cultures. 
 but there is  no way of knowing what the numbers generated in this approach represent. . The  typical number of functional individuals at an average site could be interpreted  for myxomycetes as the total number of functional individuals over multiple  years. . It is important to consider both known localities and an estimate of the  likely number of unrecorded localities to obtain an estimate of the total number  of localities and hence the total population size. 
There are relatively little data  on the variation in abundance displayed by species of myxomycetes during a  single season or over several years. . Most studies are carried out during a single  expedition, and this type of effort does not yield data about phenology. 
As we  can see, the knowledge of the spatial and temporal distribution of myxomycetes  in the various microhabitats in which they occur is still far too limited. . Given that scenario, an interesting proposal to consider for the conservation  of myxomycetes is the “microhabitat approach” proposed by Schnittler et al. .  (2011), in which the target of conservation is the microhabitat used by microor- ganisms rather than the species. . This is similar to the idea of targeting ecosys- tems rather than individual species of macroscopic organisms due to the added  value of ecological networks. 
 ecosystem functioning. .  and the maintenance of  important biological processes (Cadotte et al.. .  2011)  Using this approach. 
 the  determination of the species of myxomycetes involved could be carried out by  consolidated specialists. .  the modern research approaches could be the respon- sibility of highly trained students. .  and the basic ecological quantification could  easily be determined by conservationists and/or laypersons. 
Such a division of  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    427 labor has the potential of increasing the quality and quantity of data in several  important selected biological systems worldwide. . Despite the lack of a consolidated strategy for the conservation of myxomy- cetes. .  the role of different actors in the successful inclusion of myxomycetes in  the lists of managed groups is a key for the development of standard guidelines. 
 Since several other groups of living organisms have already been included in re- gional and international management systems. .  the different stakeholders in the  field of the conservation have already accumulated experience in the creation. 
  implementation. .  and control of such systems (i.e.. 
 NGOs   government branches  dealing with conservation. .  universities. .  and communities of individuals sur- rounding protected areas). 
In this way. .  there is no reason to think that most of  these management models would not work on myxomycetes. .  particularly those  created to apply to microscopic groups (like the “microhabitat approach”). . In  fact   such consideration might even represent an interesting option for some  myxomycete specialists to engage efforts in an integrated field that makes use. .   but not exclusively. 
 of biological information. . The concepts of management and conservation require more integrated,  ideally holistic strategies and multidisciplinary teams than most classical bio- logical topics. . However   it still seems that most myxomycete specialists are  disconnected with these types of initiatives and. .  as mentioned earlier. 
 most proj- ects designed in the past decade target intrinsic aspects of the biology of myxo- mycetes. .  such as their evolutionary path. .  phylogeny. .  and molecular taxonomy. 
 The latter does make sense considering the limited available information about  myxomycetes using modern techniques during the period when those proto- cols have been used. . However   it still points out the fact that most myxomycete  research is limited in its applicability for other disciplines. .  multidisciplinary  design. 
 and conceptualization in the context of management and conservation. . Most individuals involved in wildlife or nature management understand  that when it comes to nature there are two main discursive approaches in the  field. 
The first one is the classical scientific path that attempts to manage na- ture based on empirical data collected independently by groups of researchers. .  Advocates of this approach tend to use primarily “hard” data to make conclu- sions that can be used for the rational management of the biological group or  system under scrutiny. . The second approach is the politically supported path in  which decisions are made based on contextual elements taking place at a larger  scale within national or international political agendas. . With this strategy. 
 the  management of biological groups or systems is primarily seen as a function  of current international pressures. .  legislation in place. .  and even popularity of  jurisdiction-level decisions. 
In practice, most universities and research institu- tions tend to favor the first approach, whereas NGOs and governments primarily  use the second one. . The goal of any stakeholder in the management and conservation field is  the implementation of sustainable practices associated with the preservation of  either a group of organisms or the biological systems sustaining such a group. 
 428     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology In this manner. .  since such preservation should theoretically be as strong as pos- sible. 
 it seems illogical to believe that only one of the approaches mentioned  earlier would be enough to provide the requirements for a realistic implementa- tion of a management program. . Most successful conservation stakeholders have  learned over time that a series of social. .  cultural   economic   political. .  historical. 
  and spiritual variables play an important role in the successful implementation  of the initiatives and that strongly biased approaches usually fail. . In this sense, most individuals would not understand why some conserva- tion teams are performing “perceptional” or “conceptual” studies in relation to  the management of nature. 
However, it is easy to understand that one of the keys  of sustainability is the promotion of local actions in favor of local communi- ties. . As such   it seems highly unrealistic to determine large geographical-scale  guidelines for the management of biological systems without considering the  homogeneity of perceptional social systems within the same geographical unit. .  Such a mistake has been documented to undermine the value of some visions of  life, usually practiced by small, nonpowerful social groups, and conceptually  empower those already with power. 
For myxomycetes, for example, it is very  interesting to see the historical empowerment and current semiindependence of  some geographical areas where myxomycete specialists have worked. . This is  not surprising given the local natural extensionist action of researchers. 
 but it  shows that there are simply not enough researchers of myxomycetes worldwide  to cover a large extent of the planet. . However   the observed normal evolution  of myxomycete research has not only enriched the field through healthy com- petition and different project designs but also favored much needed research  synergies. 
 training of young researchers. .  and institutional collaborations. . Such  a legacy should be maintained by the current and the next generation of myxo- mycete specialists and even boosted through more integrated approaches that  also consider the multiperspective considerations mentioned earlier in this  chapter. . Given all of these considerations. 
 does it make sense to generate strategies  for the conservation of myxomycetes? To what extent are these organisms really  threatened (certainly a difficult question to address)? Or should they be simply  included in conservation agendas targeting microbial diversity? It would have  been easy to justify either path if myxomycetes were documented to affect in  any way our human lifestyle. .  but it probably does makes more sense to include  them in general microbial conservation programs given their relative innocuity. .  The reasons may come from two different directions. . On one hand. 
 most micro- bial communities beyond the myxomycetes are also poorly documented in most  biological systems worldwide. .  and on the other hand. .  the case of most discrete  nonpathogenic microbial communities is hard to make due to the cognitive dis- tance between mildly innocuous microbes and human societies. . For instance. .  it is reasonable to think that only some groups of microscopic  organisms have a positive health effect on societies; however. .  due to the poor  documentation of across-group microbial relationships. .  there is a current trend  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    429 to generalize the concept of microbial conservation for collective health (Berg  et al.. 
 2014; O’Doherty et al.. .  2016; Panizzon et al.. .  2015)  In that scenario. 
 it  seems reasonable to include myxomycetes in the groups of organisms to be  managed. .  but such a trend also shows one more fields of work where myxomy- cete specialists could potentially engage with public health researchers. . There  has been some research directed toward the potential health interactions of  myxomycetes and humans. .  particularly with respect to allergies (Lierl. .  2013)    but the documentation of a more complete scenario has not as yet been carried  out in a comprehensive manner. . In terms of ecological relevance, the topic of management and conservation  of myxomycetes is also limited in extent, scope, and design. 
As mentioned ear- lier in this chapter and more thoroughly in other chapters of this volume. .  most  of the historical research on myxomycetes has been primarily taxonomic and  most of the ecologically meaningful relationships studied by researchers com- prise only a basic glimpse of the interactions of the group and the surrounding  biotic and abiotic elements. . It is perhaps safe to say that most of the conceptual  advancements in the ecological study of myxomycetes were developed in the  first part of the 20th century and that most modern researchers have supported  the “gap filling” problem at this point. . Most ecological research has either taken  a basic approach or considered the ecological relationships as a byproduct of the  taxonomic goals pursued. 
In that way. .  the ecology of myxomycetes as we know  it today is a compendium of natural history and biology of the particular spe- cies or assemblages of species and not necessarily a more complex depiction of  network interactions. .  energy flows. .  and life cycle–integrated analyses entangled  in theoretical biological elements. 
Interestingly. .  myxomycetes have several particularities that can be explored  in depth from different perspectives in the future to develop such theoretical  connections and strengthen the working vision of research teams. . For this rea- son. 
 and also given the recent advancements in the techniques and approaches  followed by researchers. .  it seems logical that the near future may witness many  interesting ecological elements relating to myxomycetes that are as yet undocu- mented in the published literature. . Such potential advances would be more relevant if conceptual elements of  the management and conservation approaches were considered. . As mentioned  earlier, integrated stories tend to be favored, particularly at the granting agency  level, over simple ones. . For instance. 
 the topics of microbial trophic networks. .   gene flow. .  forest fragmentation. .  and ecosystem services could be adapted to  construct an integrated project intended to document the landscape-mediated  gene flow capacity of microbes in the framework of management and conserva- tion of ecosystem services. 
Such a comprehensive project sounds different from  simply focusing on the different parts. .  and it may provide more data on the con- textual interactions that affect the biology of the group with the advantage that it  can also generate information for those researchers working on the conservation  strategies of myxomycetes. . 430     Myxomycetes: Biology. 
 Systematics. .  Biogeography. .  and Ecology It is understandable that at the local level there should still be efforts to  document taxonomic assemblages associated with different forest types. 
 sub- strates. .  and other ecological compartments. . However, at the regional and higher  levels, efforts should target the integrated approach recently mentioned while  also including elements for the development of new lines of research. . This is  the reason why teams of researchers are necessary for larger geographical scales  and the reason why extensionism and training. .  either through technology-based  strategies or other techniques of communication. 
 should still take place. . Despite the latter. 
 it is important to remember that myxomycetes. .  as is the  case for any other group of organisms living on the planet. .  do interact with our  species and that there are several other issues for which there may only be lim- ited documentation that could be studied in the future. . In particular. 
 the negative  effects on myxomycete populations facilitated by global phenomena. .  such as  climate change. .  land use change. 
 and human-mediated dispersal (i.e.. .  myxo- mycetes as invasive species) are good areas for future study within the field of  conservation. 
For instance. .  since temperature and moisture are thought to be the  main factors limiting the occurrence of myxomycetes. .  the anticipated changes  in climate regimes are almost certainly going to have a significant impact upon  their distribution and ecology. . This will likely be true for those species of myxo- mycetes restricted to specific types of microhabitats (e.g.. 
 alpine snowbanks). .   for those which are confined to geographical areas that are limited in extent  (e.g.. .  small oceanic islands). 
 and for assemblages of species associated with  deserts and the polar regions of the world. .  which are highly sensitive ecological  systems. 
But any evaluation of the impact of climate change on myxomycetes  is extremely difficult. . The main question is whether myxomycetes react to cli- mate change at all? If they do react. .  in what way is such effect expressed? Are  there any species of myxomycetes that might be threatened by climate change?  Is it even possible to assess a cause–effect relationship for organisms that are  ephemeral and usually so hidden in nature? In future research. .  at least two pos- sible effects of climate change should be clearly distinguished. 
First, the effect of climate change on the composition of myxomycete as- semblages, which does not necessarily consider the threat to individual spe- cies, must be assessed. . Second, the effects of climate change on a particular  species of myxomycete, which may well be threatened and thus would war- rant inclusion on Red Lists, needs to be evaluated. 
Using species distribution  models. .  modeling metapopulation dynamics and various other methods are dif- ficult to apply to myxomycetes. 
 in part because there are limited (and rather  fragmentary) data available from studies of their distribution around the world. .  Moreover   distribution data are based on the visible stage in the life cycle—the  fruiting body—which is possible to find and identify but only reveals limited in- formation regarding the abundance of the species. . Truly definitive confirmation  of species occurrences at a specific locality would require a DNA-based analy- sis of soil. 
 organic matter. .  living plants. .  atmosphere. 
 and water—essentially  any place where it is possible to find myxomycetes in one of the cryptic but  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    431 active stages of their life cycle (i.e.. .  amoeboflagellates and plasmodia). 
Most  of the data about the occurrence of myxomycetes in many areas of the world  is based on the results obtained in single expeditions. . To truly determine the  impact of climate change on the distribution of myxomycetes. .  there needs to  be regular monitoring of myxomycete habitats in several study sites. 
 where all  possible climatic parameters (e.g.. .  amount and type of precipitation. .  humidity    and temperature) would be recorded daily. 
 weekly   monthly   seasonally. .  and  on a yearly basis. 
Only then would it be possible in that way to determine the  ecological resilience of myxomycete populations and the role of biological sys- tems to modulate such resilience. . All these future directions of study around  the concept of climate change may provide much needed information on myxo- mycetes. 
 contribute to the multidisciplinary approach and collaborative efforts  to study the group. .  and construct the basis for more complex research projects  involving the myxomycetes as a group. .  or of a particular species of interest  within the group. 
The management and conservation of myxomycetes should not be a discrete  field of action within the community of myxomycete researchers and specialists. .   but a common horizontal element embedded in any project on myxomycetes. .  The likelihood of microbial groups to be integrated in more formal conserva- tion efforts depends heavily on the activity of the research community and their  interaction with other individuals. 
 agencies   government offices. .  NGOs and the  public. 
The strategy should probably look to integrate myxomycetes in more  general efforts to manage and conserve microbial communities. .  taking into con- sideration their important participation toward ecosystem functioning and. 
 by  default. .  the goods and services provided. . In this sense. 
 it is also imperative to  begin integrating this element in professional meetings and in extension pro- grams more strongly than in the past. .  to generate other types of support from the  academic and the general public communities as well. 
PUTTING THE PIECES TOGETHER Modern researchers. .  specialists. 
 and individuals interested in myxomycetes  face a common shortcoming. .  the poor geographical documentation of the group  (although better than for most other groups of protists) and the limited avail- ability of integrated information have not moved myxomycetes higher up in  social agendas. . Except for some myxomycetes that have been studied as model  organisms, the biology of most species and the two tropic stages in the life  cycle are poorly documented. . Most of the work on the group has been strictly  scientific, and specialists have not looked to include this in their environmen- tal plans. . The range of action by myxomycete specialists has been limited by  their number and their monothematic vision of work. . Language barriers, train- ing centers for newer generations of specialists, and a large infrastructural/ technical gap between developed and developing institutions are still present  worldwide. 
432     Myxomycetes: Biology. .  Systematics. .  Biogeography. 
 and Ecology Despite these challenges and obstacles for the generation of information in  myxomycetes around the world. .  this is the most active moment in history for  the documentation of the biology or myxomycetes. 
A very tangible proof of the  latter is the present volume. .  which summarizes through the eyes of world-class  researchers and specialists. 
 the accumulated knowledge on myxomycetes dur- ing the last half century or so. . Since a multidisciplinary approach. .  including ele- ments from applied sciences. 
 education. .  and communication has been pursued  herein. 
 it is expected that this volume will represent a major contribution to the  development of myxomycete activity in the foreseeable future. . However, it is still the responsibility of all the individuals involved one or  way or another with myxomycetes to promote the inclusion of the group in  other fields of research. 
Topics   such as management and conservation. .  climate  change monitoring. 
 and applicability of myxomycetes in new areas of science. .   should be transversal elements in the development of research in the future. . A  mixed-channel, multilanguage approach to disseminating data and more mod- ern communication strategies should be used by teams of researchers looking to  sustain integrated lines of research (Fig. 
13 3)  Given the accumulation of information on myxomycetes facilitated by  researchers in the past and the newer developments generated by modern teams. .   it is necessary to give credit to the comparatively smaller number of individu- als that have engaged in the generation of information about the group. . It is  understandable that a deeper disconnection between the nonspecialized public  FIGURE 13.3 Word map showing the concept relationships among communication strat- egies. 
 research   and conservation/management of myxomycetes proposed in the present  chapter. . This is intended to serve a basis for debate in different spaces and to promote the discus- sion of nonbiological elements in biological venues. . As observed in other chapters of this volume,  the community of myxomycete researchers also use the word “myxos” to refer to them. . Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    433 and myxomycetes has always existed than is the case for other groups of living  organisms, such as vertebrates and plants. . However   it seems about time for  myxomycetes to be included in general microbial conservation agendas and  other types of social efforts with the objective of managing more responsibly  the natural resources of the planet. . Biological systems and important energy  transfer networks relying on bottom-up dynamics could use integrated infor- mation on myxomycetes to quantify more accurately their own organization  and. 
 with that. .  provide policy makers with arguments to create guidelines for  microbial conservation. . The natural paths taken by researchers at different moments in history are  logical and contextual, and they should be embraced by the community of myxo- mycete specialists rather than criticized. 
At least in recent decades. .  the former  has been the trend observed by the research community. .  and such a legacy of  professional respect and tolerance should be maintained by the younger genera- tions of specialists. . Given the fact that more complex research designs. .  including  transversal elements and deeper theoretical considerations. 
 should be expected  in the future. .  it is important for specialists to address their contextual limiting  factors and understand their real capacities. . This relevant task is key for the  establishment of research groups that can work together. .  share capacities. 
 and  push the research goals ahead. .  particularly for a group of microorganisms for  which there is still only a very limited number of specialists around the world. . Overall, myxomycetes represent a very interesting assemblage of micro- organisms with many characteristics that are unique to the group. 
Although  their formal study. .  as documented in Chapter 2 of the present volume. .  has ac- cumulated over 350 years of work and a substantial body of information on  the biology of myxomycetes is currently available. 
 there is still plenty of room  for new research to be carried out. . The higher resolution capacity of modern  techniques and the possibilities of multidisciplinary integration provided by the  current research pressures. .  represent both challenges and opportunities for the  community of specialists on the group. . In the 21st century. .  myxomycetes are  far from being well documented from most of the different perspectives from  which the group can be studied. 
 and creative team-based work is necessary to  move forward common goals intended to continue the documentation of the  group. . Several current researchers have understood this. .  but it is the task of the  younger generation of individuals interested in the group to continue promoting  the study of myxomycetes all over the world. . REFERENCES Berg, G., Grube, M., Schloter, M., Smalla, K., 2014. 
The plant microbiome and its importance for  plant and human health. . Front  Microbiol  5, 491   Boney, R., Shirk, J.L., Phillips, T.B., Wiggins, A., Ballard, H.L., Miller-Rushing, A.J., Parrish, J.K.,  2014. 
Next steps for citizen science. . Science 343 (6178), 1436–1437. .  Cadotte, M.W., Carscadden, K., Mirotchnick, N., 2011. . Beyond species: functional diversity and the  maintenance of ecological processes and services. 
J  Appl  Ecol  48 (5), 1079–1087. .  434     Myxomycetes: Biology, Systematics, Biogeography, and Ecology Cummings, J.L., Teng, B.S., 2003. 
Transferring R&D knowledge: the key factors affecting knowl- edge transfer success. . J  Eng  Technol  Manage  20 (1–2), 39–68. .  Gong, X., Borisov, N., Kiyavash, N., Schear, N., 2012. . Website detection using remote traffic  analysis. 
In: Fishner-Hubner, S., Wright, M. . (Eds.), Privacy Enhancing Technologies. . Springer  Verlag, Berlin, pp. . 58–78   Gubbia, J., Buyyab, R., Marusica, S., Palaniswamia, M., 2013. 
Internet of Things (IoT): a vision,  architectural elements, and future directions. . Fut  Gener  Comput  Syst  29 (7), 1645–1660. .  Guest, D.E., 1997. 
Human resource management and performance: a review and research agenda. .  Int  J  Hum  Resour  Manage  8 (3), 263–276. .  Hagiwara, H., Yamamoto, Y., 1995. 
Myxomycetes of Japan. . Heibonsha, Tokyo, Japan. .  Jewitt, C., 2012. . Multimodal Teaching and Learning. 
Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ. .  Keller, H.W., Everhart, S.E., 2010. 
Importance of myxomycetes in biological research and teaching. .  In: Papers in Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska (Paper 366). . Kramer, A., Bekeschus, S., Bröker, B.M., Schleibinger, S., Razavi, B., Assadian, O., 2013. 
 Maintaining health by balancing microbial exposure and prevention of infection: the hygiene  hypothesis versus the hypothesis of early immune challenge. . J  Hosp  Infect  83, S29–S34. .  Kryvomaz, T., Stephenson, S.L., 2016. 
Preliminary evaluation of the possible impact of climate  change on myxomycetes. . Nova Hedwigia 104, 5–30. .  Lado, C., Pando, F., 1997. 
Myxomycetes: I. . Ceratiomyxales, Echinosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. .  Vol  2  Flora Micológica Ibérica. 
CSIC, Madrid, Spain. . Lado, C., Wrigley de Basanta, D., 2008. . A review of neotropical myxomycetes (1828–2008). 
 Anales Jard. . Bot  Madrid 65 (2), 211–254. .  Leydesdorff, L., 2013. . Triple helix of university-industry-government relations. 
In: Carayaniss,  E.G. . (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Creativity, Invention, Innovation and Entrepreneurship. . Springer,  New York, NY, pp. . 1844–1851   Lierl, M.B., 2013. 
Myxomycete (slime mold) spores: unrecognized aeroallergens? Ann. . Allergy  Asthma Immunol. 
111 (6), 537–541. .  MacDermott, M.A., Hand, B., 2015. 
Improving scientific literacy through multimodal communica- tion: strategies, benefits and challenges. . School Sci. . Rev  97, 15–20   Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1993. . Die Myxomyceten, Band 1: Ceratiomyxales, Echi- nosteliales, Liceales, Trichiales. 
Karlheinz Baumann Verlag, Germany. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 1995. . Die Myxomyceten, Band 2: Physarales. 
Karlheinz  Baumann Verlag, Germany. .  Neubert, H., Nowotny, W., Baumann, K., 2000. 
Die Myxomyceten, Band 3: Stemonitales. . Karlheinz  Baumann Verlag, Germany. .  O’Doherty, K.C., Virani, A., Wilcox, E.A., 2016. . The human microbiome and public health: social  and ethical considerations. . Am  J  Public Health 106 (3), 414–420. .  Panizzon, J.P., Pilz, J.H.L., Knaak, N., Ramos, R.C., Ziegler, D.R., Fiuza, L.M., 2015. 
Microbial  diversity: relevance and relationship between environmental conservation and human health. .  Braz  Arch  Biol  Technol  58 (1), 137–145. .  Pointing, S.B., Belnap, J., 2012. 
Microbial colonization and controls in dryland systems. . Nat  Rev   Microbiol. 
10, 551–562. .  Poulain, M., Meyer, M., Bozonnet, J., 2011. 
Les Myxomycètes. . FMBDS, Delémont, France. .  Raber, M., Richter, J., 2008. 
Bringing social action back into the social work curriculum: a model  for “hands-on” learning. . J  Teach  Soc  Work 19, 77–91. .  Rea-Maminta, M.A.D., Dagamac, N.H.A., Huyop, F.Z., Wahab, R.A., dela Cruz, T.E.E., 2015. .  Comparative diversity and heavy metal biosorption of myxomycetes from forest patches on  ultramafic and volcanic soils. 
Chem  Ecol  31, 741–753. .  Myxomycetes in the 21st Century  Chapter | 13    435 Richerzhagen, C., 2014. 
The Nagoya protocol: fragmentation or consolidation? Resources 3,  135–151. .  Roth, G., Dicke, U., 2005. . Evolution of the brain and intelligence. 
Trends  Cogn  Sci  9 (5), 250–257. .  Schnittler, M., Kummer, V., Kuhnt, A., Krieglsteiner, L., Flatau, L., Müller, H., Täglich, U., 2011. 
 Rote Liste und Gesamtartenliste der Schleimpilze (Myxomycetes) Deutschlands. . Vegetation- skunde 70 (6), 125–234. .  Stephenson, S.L., Schnittler, M., Novozhilov, M., 2008. 
Myxomycete diversity and distribution  from the fossil record to the present. . Biodivers  Conserv  17 (2), 285–301. 
 Thorson, E., Moore, J. . (Eds.), 1996. . Integrated Communication: Synergy of Persuasive Voices. 
 Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ. .  UNEP, 2011. 
Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing  of Benefits Arising From Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity. . Secre- tariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Montreal, Canada. .  Velivelli, S.L.S., Sessitsch, A., Prestwich, B.D., 2014. 
The role of microbial inoculants in integrated  crop management systems. . Potato Res. . 57, 291–309. .  Wilson, E.O., 1984. . Biophilia  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. .  Page left intentionally blank 437 Index A Academic communication strategists. 
 414 Acanthamoeba castellani. .  115 Acarids. .  300 Acuminate tips. 
 10 Adenosine. .  131 Aerial litter. 
 257   278 ferns in lowland monsoon forests. .  260 mangroves. 
 microhabitat for  myxomycetes. .  279 protosteliid amoebae. 
 assemblages of. .  278 Aerial microhabitats. .  279 Aethalium septicum. .  6   66 Agar cultures. 
 338   350   394–395 amoeboflagellate cells. .  view of   395 cytoplasmic streaming. 
 view of   394 laboratory equipment for observing. .  338 of myxomycetes. .  353 Physarum polycephalum. .  394 plasmodium development. 
 394   395 sporocarp forming. .  338 technique used to make an agar slide. .  395 Agathidium. .  300 Agave spp.. .  334 Agnihothrudu. 
 V    60 A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes. .  52 A History of Plants. 
 42 Alexopoulos. .  Constantine J.. 
 1   57 Allantoid spores. .  10 Alpine grasslands. 
 315 Alwisia bombarda. .  99   301 Amino acids. 
 85   110   133 Amitochondriate. .  115 Amoeboflagellates. .  10   273   282   334    354   356 cells. 
 147   177   205 characteristics of. .  177 flagellated cells. .  177 naked amoeboid cells. 
 177 nutrition. .  177 zygote formation. .  177 isolation method. 
 353 nutrient cycling role. .  273 physiology. .  351 stage. 
 of life cycle. .  175 Amoebozoa. .  1   92   94   114   212 mitochondrial DNA genomes. 
 comparison. .   115–117 mitochondrial gene expression in. .  118 mtDNAs  comparison of three prototypes. .  117 mitochondria RNA editing in. .  121 prototype. 
 gene content comparison  of. .  119 RNA gene content comparison. .  120 A Monograph of the Mycetozoa. 
 46   48 Amplicons. .  89 Anacardium occidentale. .  318 Anaerobic soils. .  317 Angiosperms. .  85 Animals dispersing myxomycete spores. 
 300 Anisotoma. .  300 Annals and Magazine of Natural History. .  44 Anticancer compounds  alkaloids. 
 369 arcyriaflavin C. .  369 makaluvamine A. .  369 makaluvamine C. .  369 bisindole alkaloid (dihydroarcyriarubin C). .   369 cycloanthranilylproline (fuligocandin B). .   369 fruiting bodies and plasmodia. .  isolation  from. 
 369 polymer polycefin. .  369 Anticodons. .  112 Aphanoplasmodium. .  10   178   219   276 Apogamy. 
 13   36 life cycle. .  10 Apomixis. .  13 Archaeplastida. .  92 Archamoebae. .  114 Arctic tundra. 
 2 Arcuate. .  13 Arcyria cinerea. .  34   209   317 Arcyria cinerea var. . digitata   301 Arcyria denudata. 
 17   210   317 arcyriarubins and arycyriaflavins  isolation. .  368 arcyroxocin B isolation. .  371 438    Index Arcyria ferruginea. 
 15 bisindole alkaloid (dihydroarcyriarubin C)  isolation. .  369 HeLa cells. .  cytotoxic activity against. .  369 fruiting body development. .  15 Arcyriaflavin C. 
 187 cell-cycle checkpoint inhibition. .  371 cell-cycle-regulating cyclin-dependent  kinase (CDK) inhibition. .  371 G2/M and G1 phases inhibition. .  369 Metatrichia vesparia. 
 isolation from. .  371 protein kinase C inhibition. .  371 topoisomerase I-mediated DNA cleavage. .  371 Wnt (Wingless-related integration site)  signal inhibitory activity. 
 369 Arcyria leiocarpa. .  317 Arcyria major. .  65 Arcyria nutans. .  17 Arcyria obvelata. 
 dihydroarcyriacyanin A  isolation. .  371 Arcyria stipata. .  63   217 Arcyria versicolor. 
 17 Arcyroxocin B. .  187 Arcyria denudata. 
 isolation from. .  371 Jurkat cells. .  cytotoxic activity against. .  371 Areolate. .  13 Asian Paleotropical forests. 
 314 Asperulate. .  13 Assemblages  composition. .  272 inflorescences. .  species associated with. 
 279 Assimilative motile stage. .  205 Assimilative (trophic) phase. 
 13 Austen. .  Jane   154 Axenic cultures. 
 13   353 B Baas-Becking model. .  of ubiquity. 
 304 Bacillus cereus. .  194 Bacillus subtilis. .  193 Bacteriovores. 
 14 Badhamia apiculospora. .  30   281   317 Badhamia bispora. 
 16 Badhamia capsulifera. .  16 Badhamia crassipella. .  16 Badhamia foliicola. .  318 Badhamia lilacina. .  310 Badhamia melanospora. .  209   279   303   304   316 Badhamia nitens. .  16 Badhamia panicea. 
 13 badhamoid calcareous capillitial network. .  13 Badhamia papaveracea. .  16 Badhamia populina. .  16 Badhamia utricularis. .  16   46   340 Badhamia versicolor. 
 16 Badhamioid. .  13 Badhamis gracilis. .  158 Barbeyella minutissima. .  272   306   307   310    313   314 Bar-coding technique. .  129 Bark-inhabiting myxomycetes. 
 313 Bary   Heinrich Anton de. .  45 Bayesian Inference. .  92 Beetle larvae. 
 349 Berkeley. .  Miles Joseph. 
 44 Betula alleghaniensis. .  277 Bilateria. .  84 Binomial nomenclature system. 
 205 Bioactive compounds. .  365–374 anticancer compounds. .  369–372 antimicrobial compounds. .  366–369 fungi (Candida albicans). 
 effects on. .  366 Gram-positive bacteria (Bacillus subtilis). .   effects on. 
 366 myxomycete lipids. .  biodiesel production  initial studies. .  373–374 nature determination. 
 challenges in. .  365 plasmodia. 
 importance of. .  369 Bioactivity. 
 of myxomycetes  chemical characteristics. .  195 dienoic acids. .  196 22-dihydrolanosterol. .  195 EDX technology. 
 196 in fruiting bodies. .  196 isolation. .  of physarochrome A and  chrysophysarin. 
 195 research methods of study. .  195 filter paper diffusion method. .  195 MTT cell proliferation. .  195 Biodiversity. 
 61 inventory. .  334 marketing. 
 420 Biology of the Myxomycetes. .  67 Biopolymer sequences. .  85 Bioprospecting. .  420 Bioremediators. .  418 Birefringence. .  218 Bootstrapping. .  92 Bordered reticulate. 
 14 Botanical Research Institute of Texas. .  6 Botanic Garden at Buitenzorg. 
 Java   61 Brefeldia maxima. .  27   301 Brefeld. 
 Oscar   46 British Fungi. .  44 British Mycological Society. .  55 Index     439 Bromeliads. .  species of Puya. 
 342 Broome. .  Christopher Edmund. 
 44 Bryophilous (musicolous) myxomycetes. .  14 Bryophytes. .  in ravines. 
 341 C Caespitose. .  14 Calcareous bodies (lime knots or nodes). 
 14 Calluna vulgaris. .  319 Calonema aureum. 
 17 Calyculus. .  15 Campesterol. .  189 Candolle. .  Augustin Pyramus de. 
 44 Capillitium. .  15   83   205   214 birefringent. 
 218 branching. .  220 moniliform. .  215 Carl Batsch. .  August Johann Georg. 
 42 Cartilaginous. .  16 Cavostellids. .  123 Centrioles (basal bodies). .  16 Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. .  182   213   275 ceratiopyrone isolated from. 
 182 fruiting bodies. .  213 germination process. 
 213 Ceratiomyxales. .  213 order. 
 227 Ceratiomyxa morchella. .  306   339 Ceratiomyxomycetidae. .  213   226 Chemical sensor development. 
 381 Physarum. .  role of   381 volatile aromatic substances. 
 response to. .  381 Chemotaxis. .  180 Chordata. 
 84 Chromatograms. .  90 Chromista. 
 92 Chromosomes. .  107 number and telomeres. .  109 Cienkowski. .  Leo   46 Cinereous. 
 16 Circumscissile. .  16 Cladodes. .  334 Cladonia spp. . in dry stacks, 317 Classroom/educational program, use in, 389 Clastoderma, 96 Clavate, 16 Clustered spores (spore balls), 16 Codon-anticodon interactions, 113 Coenocyte (syncytium), 16 Cogs, 16 COI. . See Cytochrome c oxidase (COI)  Coiled. 
 16 Cold moist chambers. .  346 Collaria arcyrionema. 
 279   317 drawing. .  409 Collaria rubens. .  97 Collembola. .  300 Colloderma oculatum. .  285   310 Color sensor development. 
 381 Physarum. .  role of   381 electrodes placement. .  381 illumination. .  electrical potential  oscillatory activity. 
 381 photo-sensitivity. .  381 Columella. .  17   205 Comatricha elegans. .  310 Comatricha laxa. .  209 Comatricha mirabilis. .  317 Comatricha nigra. 
 310 Comatricha nigricapillitia. .  220 Comatricha pulchella. .  318 Comatrichia spinispora. .  312 Communication strategies. .  research   and  conservation/management  concept relationships among. 
 432 The Comparative Morphology and Biology of the  Fungi. .  Mycetozoa and Bacteria. 
 45 Conosa. .  branches   94 aerobic Eumycetozoa. .  94 anaerobic Archamoebae. 
 94 Variosea. .  94 Conservation/management. .  424–431 ecological relevance. .  429 extinction risk categories. 
 425 gene flow capacity. .  role of   429 guidelines. 
 424 IUCN quantitative analyses. .  425 IUCN Red List criteria. 
 425 critically endangered (CR). .  426 endangered (EN). .  426 vulnerable (VU). 
 426 microhabitat approach. .  426 multidisciplinary design. 
 427 myxomycete populations. .  negative effects  on. .  430 climate change. .  effect of. 
 430 politically supported path. .  427 population size evaluation. .  425 potential health interactions. 
 428 regional and international management  systems. .  427 regional red lists. .  425 sustainable practices. 
 role of   427 taxonomic assemblages documentation. .  430 threat and conservation approach. 
 424 440    Index Conspectus Fungorum. .  44 Cooke   Mordecai Cubitt. 
 46 Coprophilous myxomycetes  diversity and abundance. .  281 ecology. .  281 fimicolous. 
 17 Cortex. .  17 Corticarina truncatella. .  285 Corticolous myxomycetes. 
 17 diversity. .  278 environmental factors. .  277 Cosmopolitan. 
 2 Craterium leucocephalum. .  12   25 Craterium retisporum. 
 312 Cribraria. .  100 Cribraria cancellata. 
 43   373 cribrarione B isolation. .  373 Cribraria confusa. 
 272   318 Cribraria meylanii  cribrarione C isolation. .  373 Cribraria purpurea. .  193 antimicrobial activity. 
 368 dihydrofuranonaphthoquinone pigment  (cribrarione A) isolation. .  368 small fruiting bodies. .  368 Cribraria spp.. .  310 Cribraria tecta. .  312 Cribraria violacea. .  310 Cribraria zonatispora. .  349 Cribrarione. .  184 Cryptista. .  92 Crystalline calcareous bodies. 
 18 Cultivation. .  of myxomycetes. .  350 Cultures. .  349 contamination of. .  354 in diffuse daylight. 
 343 laboratory. .  343 microenvironmental conditions. 
 343 Curtis. .  Moses Ashley. 
 44 Cyclic phosphatidic acid. .  190 Cyclopentane hydrogen phenanthrene. .  190 Cylindrical. 
 18 Cysteine. .  113 Cytidines. 
 122   132   134 Cytochrome c oxidase (COI). .  150 Cytochrome oxidase. 
 123 D Dactylopodida. .  114 Damirone C. .  190 ddNTP. 
See Dideoxynucleotide triphosphates  (ddNTP)  Decaying cactus stems. .  334 Dehiscence mechanism  of Licea kleistobolus. 
 215 Dehiscent. .  18 Dehydrogenase complex. .  123 Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  (DGGE). 
 151–152   355 Dendrobium candidum. .  318 De Nederlandse Myxomyceten. 
 52 Deoxysugar esters. .  368 enteridinines A. .  368 enteridinines B. .  368 Enteridium lycoperdon. .  isolation   from. 
 368 Desert myxomycetes. .  317 Deuterostomia. .  84 Dextral. 
 18 DGGE  See Denaturing gradient gel  electrophoresis (DGGE)  Diachea arboricola. .  18   276 Diacheopsis effusa. .  284 Diacheopsis mitchellii. 
 317 Dianema aggregatum. .  50 Dianema corticatum. .  16 Diaphanosoma dubium. 
 284 Diaphoretickes. .  92 Dichotomous. .  19 Dickson. 
 James   44 Dictydiaethalium plumbeum. .  6   100 Dictydine (plasmodic) granules. .  19 Dictydium rutilum. .  66 Dictyostelids. .  114   123 Dictyostelium discoideum. .  115 Dideoxynucleotide triphosphates   (ddNTP). 
 90 Diderma alpinum. .  310 Diderma antarcticola. .  67 Diderma asteroides. 
 18   312 Diderma chondrioderma. .  190 Diderma effusum. .  282 Diderma floriforme. 
 18 Diderma imperiale. .  63 Diderma lucidum. .  44 Diderma niveum. .  284   310 twenty group I introns in. 
 158 Diderma radiatum. .  18   210 Diderma rugosum. .  25 Diderma sauteri. .  53 Diderma simplex. 
 310 Diderma spp.. .  339 Diderma trevelyani. 
 18 Didymiaceae. .  88 Didymium bahiense  Index     441 antimicrobial glycerolipid (bahiensol)  isolation. .  368 plasmodial culture of. 
 368 Didymium comatum. .  350 Didymium crustaceum. 
 196 Didymium deplanatum. .  284 Didymium difforme. 
 18   282   304 Didymium infundibuliforme. .  304   315 Didymium iridis. .  18   87   115   155   209 apogamic life cycle. 
 10 isozyme patterns in. .  146 mtDNA structure in. 
 128 sporangia. .  18 Didymium melanospermum. .  310 Didymium mtDNA contigs. .  128 Didymium nigripes. .  282 Myxamoebae. .  stage of life cycle. 
 177 Didymium quitense. .  18 Didymium saturnus. .  319 Didymium serpula. .  27 Didymium squamulosum. 
 18   209   279   304   354 clionasterol isolation. .  373 Didymium synsporon. .  16 Die Myxomyceten. 
 53 Differential interference contrast (DIC). .  352 Dihydroarcyriacyanin A. .  187 3   4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA). 
 365 commercialization. .  365 Parkinson’s disease treatment. .  365 Stemonitis herbatica. .  isolation from. 
 365 Dilute bacteria (Escherichia coli) culture. .  352 Dimethyl pyrrole dicarboxylates. .  368 lycogarubins A–C. .  368 Dinucleotides. 
 133   134 combinations. .  131 sequences. .  131 Diptera. .  300 Dir.S956-1 intron. 
 159 Distilled water. .  pH of   342 Distribution/diversity patterns. .  299 Ditmar. 
 L P F    44 DNA fragments. .  355 DNA sequences. .  354 Domain. 
 84 Dried specimens. .  394 Dry fruits. 
 341 Dye-terminator method. .  90 E Earthworms. .  300 Echinosteliaceae. .  100 Echinosteliales. 
 4   95   129   214   342 order. .  131   217   219   228 capillitium. .  217 fruiting bodies. .  217 plasmodium. 
 217 Echinostelium arboreum. .  3 Echinostelium brooksii. 
 310   314 Echinostelium colliculosum. .  314 Echinostelium corynophorum. .  350 Echinostelium minutum. .  276 Echinostelium spp.. .  96   308   342   346 fruiting body. .  development of. 
 217 epihypothallic. .  217 subhypothallic. .  217 protostelids. 
 relationship. .  217 Ecomorphema. .  83 Ecosystems of world  agricultural/urban habitats. .  318 boreal forests/subalpine/montane coniferous  forests. .  310 coastal habitats/mangroves. .  317 deserts/arid areas. .  316–317 heathlands. .  319 mediterranean forests/woodlands/scrub. .  312 myxomycete. 
 diversity/species composition  of. .  309 savannahs/semi-arid grasslands. .  319 steppes/prairie regions. .  315 subalpine/alpine grasslands. 
 315 temperate deciduous forests. .  311 tropical/subtropical forests. .  312–314 tundra/forest-tundra/subantarctic habitats. 
  309–310 Editing site density. .  132 Editosomes. .  131 EF-1α. . See Elongation factor-1α (EF-1α)  Ehrenberg. .  Christian Gottfried. 
 44 Elaeomyxa cerifera. .  27 Elaeomyxa miyazakiensis. 
 27 Elaters. .  20 Electron transport chain. .  123 Electrophoresis. 
 89 Elenchus Fungorum. .  43 Elongation factor (EF). .  86 Elongation factor-1α (EF-1α). 
 149 Embryophyta. .  299 Encyclopaedia Britannica (1911). .  48 Endonuclease. .  121 Endosporous myxomycetes. 
 4   20     214–216 features. .  214 Liceales. .  order   214 Enicmus rugosus. .  285 Entamoeba. .  114 442    Index Enteridinine A  Gram-positive bacteria growth. 
  inhibition. .  368 Enteridinine B. .  antifungal activity. .  368 Enteridium lycoperdon. .  185 deoxysugar esters isolation. 
 368 Enteridium splendens var. . juranum   310 Enteroamoeba. .  303 Environmental sampling. 
 355 ePCR   262   302   315 Epihypothallic development. .  20 Epimorphema. 
 83   84 Epiphyllous myxomycetes. .  279 liverworts. 
 association with. .  279 3-Epitrichiol acetate  TNF-related apoptosis. 
 reversal effects  against. .  371 Erionema aureum. .  62 Escherichia coli. 
 193   353 e-taxonomy initiatives. .  241 ETS  See External transcribed spacer (ETS)  Eukaryotes. .  85   114 Eukaryotic genomes. .  86 Eukaryotic organisms. .  114 Eumycetozoa. .  221 website. .  353 Eumycota. .  299 European Biodiversity Observation Network  (EU BON). 
 241 Evanescent. .  20 Exons   111 Exosporous myxomycetes. .  213 Ceratiomyxales. .  order   213 Exsiccata. .  333 External transcribed spacer (ETS). .  86 Extranuclear mitotic (open) division. 
 20 F Famintsin. .  Andrei Sergeevich. 
 46 Fatty acid. .  187 Feeding behavior observation. 
 401 micropredators. .  as   401 Field-based forays. 
 415 Field collection  air-drying. .  338 cost   340 environmental parameters checklist. 
 392 hand lens/eye lens. .  with   392 observation during. .  392 parameters. .  392 pill box. .  392 specimens. .  339 placement. .  in small pasteboard boxes. 
 395 timing. .  392 trips. 
 392 Fimicolous myxomycetes. .  281 Flagellated cells. .  177 associated with microenvironments. .  177 cell division. .  177 stage. .  of life cycle. 
 31 water   role of   177 Flora Cryptogamica Germaniae. .  44 Flora Mycologica Iberica. 
 51 The Flore Illustrée des Champignons d'Afrique  Centrale. .  64 Floricolous myxomycetes. .  20 Fly larvae. .  349 Foliicolous myxomycetes. 
 20 Fries   Elias Magnus. .  41   44 Fries   R E    55 Fruiting bodies. .  2   21   175   205   365 appearance of. 
 210 Arcyria affinis. .  207 Calomyxa metallica. 
 207 Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa. .  207 Ceratiomyxa morchella. .  207 Clastoderma debaryanum. .  207 Comatricha suksdorfii. 
 208 Craterium dictyosporum. .  208 Cribraria piriformis. .  207 development. 
 217   226 epihypothallic. .  217   219 subhypothallic. 
 217   218 Diderma effusum. .  208 Diderma miniatum. .  208 Didymium operculatum. 
 208 diversity research  two-hundred years of. .  305–309 Echinostelium arboreum. 
 207 examples. .  207 globose. 
 217 Hemitrichia serpula. .  208 Lamproderma splendens. 
 208 Listerella. .  215 Lycogala conicum. 
 207 morphology of. .  3   214 shapes of. 
 25 spore production. .  205 Stemonitis lignicola. 
 208 structural elements of. .  205 Trichia agaves. .  208 Tubifera microsperma. .  207 types. 
 4 Fugacious. .  21 Fulicineroside. 
 194 crown gall tumors inhibition. .  368 Fuligo candida. .  301   339 Index     443 Fuligocandin B (FCB). 
 371 extraction. .  371 synergism with TRAIL. .  371 Fuligo cinerea. 
 282   368 fulicineroside isolation. .  368 glycosidic dibenzofuran metabolite. 
 368 Fuligo intron. .  111 Fuligo megaspora. .  28 Fuligo muscorum. .  310 Fuligo septica. 
 41   111   158   210   282   318   365 GC–MS spectra of plasmodia petroleum  ether extraction of. .  191 isolation. .  of ester compound. .  190 isozyme patterns in. .  146 pigmented antibiotic materials  extraction. .  366 anthraquinoic acids. .  366 requirement. 
 for germination of spores  in. .  175 sclerotium. .  178 Fuligo septica f. 
flava  cycloanthranilylproline isolation. .  373 fuligoic acid isolation. 
 373 Fuligo spp.. .  301 Fungi cito crescents. .  333 Fungicolous myxomycetes. .  21 Fungi Natalenses. .  65 Fungi sensu lato. .  85 Furan nucleus. 
 187 Fuscisporidia. .  96 G Gasteromycetes. 
 210   219   222 GenBank. .  108   242 Gene content and chromosomal DNA. .  110 Gene mutations. .  85   127 Gene order. .  117 Genera. 
 grouping   206 Genes coding. .  123 Genes encoding. .  86 Gene sequences. 
 117   126 Genetic code. .  113 Genetic information. .  133 Genome organization. .  117 Genotypes. .  85 Geographical documentation. 
 431 Germinating/culturing myxomycete spores.. .  350 Global Biodiversity Information Facility  (GBIF). .  241 Global Biodiversity of Eumycetozoans. 
  project   59 Global communication  internet. .  role of   413 Glycosidic dibenzofuran metabolite. .  194 GPS receiver. .  334 Gregarious. .  21 Gregory. 
 Martin   61 gRNAs  See Guide RNAs (gRNAs)  Growth phenotypes. .  128 Guanosine. .  131 Guide RNAs (gRNAs). 
 133 Gunn   Ronald   66 H Habitats  canopy as. .  280 on ground sites. 
 2 microhabitats. .  334   335 Handbook of the Coniferae. 
 48 Hands-on activities. .  415 Haploid nucleus. .  107 Hartmanella veriformis. .  115 Hydrogenosomes. .  92 Heavy metals absorbtion  by myxomycetes. 
 418 Helical (spiral) bands. .  21 Hemitrichia. .  101 Hemitrichia calyculata. .  177 Hemitrichia clavata. .  177 spore germination in. 
 176 Hemitrichia imperialis. .  63   333 Hemitrichia rubrobrunnea. .  65 Hemitrichia serpula. .  4   5   303   304 Herbarium Portatile. .  1   41   42 Herbicolous myxomycetes. 
 21 Heterokaryon. .  21 Heterokaryotic nuclear state. .  37 Heterothallism. .  22   35 life cycle. .  9 species. 
 35 Hexadecanoic acid. .  190 Hierarchical position. 
 of myxomycetes. .  224 High school biology courses  myxomycetes. .  use of   391 High-throughput sequencing (HTS). 
 152 Hill   John   42 Histoire des Champignons de la France. .  43 Historical perspective  early period. .  41–44 first scientific studies. .  45–46 and future studies. 
 67–68 Lister. .  Arthur   46–49 Lister. 
 Gulielma   46–49 recent studies in Europe. .  49–55 studies in the United States. .  56–59 studies throughout the world. 
 59–67 444    Index Homing endonuclease gene P1 (HEG P1). .  159 Homopolymers. .  111 stretching. 
 111 Homothallic strains. .  301 Homothallism. .  35 Hoogsteen base pairing. .  133 Hooker. .  William   66 Human–nature interaction. 
 418 6-Hydroxystaurosporinone  protein tyrosine kinase inhibition. .  371 Hyperamoebae. .  153 Hypothallus. .  21   205   213 I ICN. . See International Code of Nomenclature  (ICN)  Indole alkaloids. 
 185   187 Information generation. .  challenges and  obstacles in. .  432 Inquiry-based teaching opportunities  techniques. 
 392–410 agar culture. .  394–395 collection maintenance. .  394 ecological patterns assessment. .   myxomycetes. 
 401 diversity indices. .  401 species:genus (S:G) ratio. .  401 species richness. .  401 feeding behavior observation. .  401 fruiting bodies. .  storage of. 
 394 high school and beyond. .  use in   402–406 collecting expeditions. 
 US National  Science Foundation (NSF). .   funded by. 
 402 college-level research projects. .  402 doctoral dissertations. 
 402 Essex Field Club. .  406 Group 4 project. .  402 laboratory exercises. .  402 myxoblitz (workshop). .  403   405 Myxotropic project. 
 402 nature societies and clubs. .  406 Planetary Biodiversity Inventory  project. 
 403 research grants. .  402 workshops. 
 403–405 moist chamber cultures. .  393–394 myxomycete infomaterials development  biodiversity conservation promotion. .   406–407 myxomycetes classification of. .  397 myxomycetes collection of. .  392   397 myxomycetes identification of. .  396 myxomycetes. 
 photographing of. .  407–410 observational skills development. .  397–400 Inserted nucleotide identity. .  specificity. 
 134 Insertional RNA editing. .  131 Integrated Taxonomic Information Systems  (ITIS). 
 241 Intercalary swellings. .  22 Internal transcribed spacer (ITS). .  149 International Code of Nomenclature (ICN). .   206   224 International Code of Zoological Nomenclature  (ICZN). .  206 International Union for Conservation of Nature  and Natural Resources (IUCN). 
 425 Intranuclear mitotic (closed) division. .  22 Introns. .  111   149   157 Iridescence. .  22 Isoacceptors. .  112 Isolating myxomycetes  agar cultures. 
 350–353 advantages/constraints. .  353–354 cold moist chamber cultures. .  345–346 environmental sequencing. 
 354–356 advantages/constraints. .  356–357 by laboratory culture. .  340 moist chambers  advantages/constraints. 
 346–349 cultures. .  340–344 IUCN. . See International Union for  Conservation of Nature and Natural  Resources (IUCN)  J Jilin Agricultural University. 
 62 Journal of Botany. .  46 Juniperus virginiana. 
 29 K Karyogamy. .  22 Kehokorin A  HeLa cells. .  cytotoxicity against. 
 371 Kelleromyxa. .  100 Kelleromyxaceae. .  215 Kelleromyxa fimicola. 
 17   281   315 Knowledge transfer. .  413 L Lakhanpal. .  T N    60 Lamproderma. .  87   315 Lamproderma argenteobruneum. .  345 Index     445 Lamproderma atrosporum. 
 28   96 Lamproderma columbinum. .  310   313   314 Lamproderma echinulatum. 
 66 Lamproderma ovoideoechinulatum  stalked sporangium. .  11 Lamproderma retirugisporum. .  19 Lamproderma sauteri. 
 28   284 Lanosterol. .  189 Latridius hirtus. .  285 Lawrence. 
 R W    66 Leocarpus fragilis. .  310 Lepidoderma chailletii. .  310 Lepidoderma crustaceum. 
 50 Lepidoderma granuliferum  sessile plasmodiocarps. .  23 Lepidoderma ovoideum. .  310 Lepidoderma peyerimhoffii. .  64 Lepidoderma tigrinum. .  285   310 Leptokurtic dispersal curves. .  301 Les Myxomycètes. 
 52 Lianas. .  341 Licea. .  346 vs  Perichaena. .  216 Licea alexopouli. .  17   281 Licea atricapillata. .  61 Licea castanea. .  99 Licea erectoides.. .  61 Licea eremophila. 
 349 Licea fimicola. .  215 Licea kleistobolus. .  314 Liceales. 
 4   214 chemical constituents from members of. .  183 metabolites from. .  182 Trichiales. 
 relationship. .  215 Liceales clade. .  129 Licea marginata. .  99 Licea minima. 
 27   272   310 Licea parasitica. .  99 Licea pusilla. 
 27 Licea species. .  342 Licea succulenticola. .  272 Licea variabilis. 
 99 Life cycle. .  285 of myxomycetes. .  205 stages. 
 8   28–35 microcyst. .  32 plasmodium. 
 32 sclerotium. .  35 spore   28   35 swarm cell. .  32 Lignicolous myxomycetes  microhabitats. 
 278 occurrence. .  275 Lindbladia cribrarioides. .  275 Lindbladia tubulina. .  314 Lindbladione. 
 185 Linear mF mitochondrial plasmid. .  126–127 Link. .  Johann Heinrich Friedrich. .  44 Linnaeus. .  Carl   42 Linnean Society. 
 46 Lister. .  Arthur   46   47 Listerella paradoxa. .  55   317 Lister. 
 Joseph Jackson. .  46 Lister. .  Gulielma   48 Lister. 
 Joseph   46   48 Litter-inhabiting myxomycetes. .  274   275   284 fruiting bodies. .  274 Liver infusions. .  353 Liverworts. .  272 Living organisms. .  molecular phylogeny of. 
 86 L1949/L2449 introns. .  157 Lobelias. .  319 Lycogala epidendrum. .  1   6   7   25   136   182    210   301   310   333   365 5  6-dihydroxyarcyriaflavin A isolation. 
 371 GC–MS spectra of petroleum ether  extraction from the fruiting bodies  of. .  185 6-hydroxystaurosporinone isolation. .  371 Lycogarubin C  anti-HSV-I virus activity. 
 368 Lycogola. .  339 Lycoperdon sanguineum sphericum. .  41 M Macbrideola cornea. 
 49 Macbrideola spp.. .  4   308   346 Macbrideola synsporos. .  16 Macbride. 
 Thomas H.. .  1 Macrideola decapillata. .  351 Macromycetozoa. 
 95 Makaluvamines. .  190 Didymium iridis. .  isolation from. 
 371 in vitro cytotoxicity. .  371 human colon tumor cell line HCT 116. .  371 ovarian cancer. 
 371 Malt/yeast agar (wMY). .  352 Mangrove swamps. .  317 Marchant. .  Jean   41 Marker genes. .  for myxomycetes. 
 86–88 Martin. .  George W.. 
 1   48   57 Massee. .  George   46 Mastigamoeba. .  114 Mating. 
 35 type alleles. .  36 446    Index Maximum Likelihood method. 
 92 Mediterranean forests. .  312 Mediterranean woodlands. .  336 Meiosis. 
 22 Melbourne Code. .  206 Melleumin. .  190 Meriderma carestiae. .  310 Mesenterica tremelloides. 
 43 Metabolites. .  of myxomycetes. 
 181 Ceratiomyxales. .  182 cytotoxic activity. 
 181 Liceales. .  182 Physarales. 
 187–190 chemical constituents from. .  188 potential source. 
 of natural active  products. .  182 research methods. 
 in study   192 antibacterial activity. .  181   193 antioxidant activity. 
 181   195 antitumor activity. .  193–194 cytotoxic activity. 
 194 Stemonitales. .  191 Trichiales. .  186–187 chemical constituents from. 
 186 Metatrichia floriformis. .  30   50 Metatrichia floripara. 
 319 Metatrichia horrida. .  65 Metatrichia vesparia. .  43 Metazoa. .  84   299 Methodica Fungorum. 
 43 Meylan. .  Charles   63 Micheli. .  Pier Antonio. 
 41 Microbial literacy. .  418 Microcysts. .  22   147 Microhabitat  plant litter. 
 role in   275 Mike the Myxo (comic strip). .  408 Minakatella longifila. .  16 Minichromosomes. 
 86   107 analysis. .  131 Mite larvae. .  349 Mitochondrial DNAs (mtDNAs). .  107   114   115 cytochrome. 
 86 gene rearrangement. .  121 in myxomycetes. .  114 polycistronic transcripts. .  118 structure and features. .  evolutionary  implications. .  123 structure. 
 relationships within the  myxomycetes based. .  123 variation in structure. .  in strains of  Physarum. .  127–128 Mitochondrial gene. .  128 Mitochondrial proteins. 
 127   133 synthesis. .  116 Mitochondrial RNA polymerase. .  110   118 protein coding genes on nuclear DNA. 
  110–111 Mitoribosome. .  123 Mitosis. .  23 Model organisms. .  389 Moist chamber culture (mc). 
 272   308   338    340   344   345   348   349   393–394 materials. .  393 microcosm establishment. .  393 microhabitat establishment. 
 393 microscopic examination. .  394 myxobacteria. .  occurrences of. 
 271 substrate material. .  394 technique. 
 214   313   346 Molecular techniques  advances of. .  153 approaches. 
 myxomycetes as model  organisms. .  160–162 incubation period. .  161 open mitosis. .  160 oscillatory cytoplasmic streaming. 
 160 spherules. .  160 sporulation. 
 160 stage specific cDNA libraries. .  161 phylogenies. .  114 for recording. 
 biodiversity and ecological  analyses. .  145 DNA sequencing. .  146 isozyme patterns. .  146 morphological identification. .  146 reproductive isolation. 
 145 Monocotyledonous herbs. .  inflorescences  of. 
 314 Morphobank. .  242 Morphology vs. 
phylogeny   100–101 Morphospecies. .  209 mRNA sequences. .  302 mtDNA phylogenies/mitochondrial bar coding. .   129–131 mtRNAP gene. .  111 Mucilago crustacea. 
 17   310   318 Multiscale information transfer. .  413 Music generation. .  role in   383 Physarum. .  role of   383 electrical potential oscillation. .  383 memristive properties. 
 383 physiological transition. .  383 Mutations. .  84 Mycetozoa. 
 1   211   222 MycoBank. .  242 Index     447 Mycologists. .  206 Mycota Lithuaniae. .  54 Myxamoebae. 
 23   31   177   338 characteristics of. .  177 motility. .  177 patterns of movement. 
 177 pseudopodium for. .  177 Myxogastres. .  210   213   222 Myxogastromycetidae. .  213 subclass. .  227 Myxomycete assemblages. 
   characterization of. .  357 Myxomycete biogeography. .  302 biogeographic hypotheses. .  304–305 The Myxomycete Biota of Japan. .  63 Myxomycete DNA. .  sequences obtaining. 
  88–90 Myxomycetes. .  1   122   307   318   344 classification. .  83   222–237 proposals. .  223 differences between traditional  classification. .  97 fruiting bodies. 
 336 identification. .  396 Google search. .  396 identification guide (or photo guide). 
 398 microscopic features. .  396 morphological features. 
 396 morphometric data. .  396 published literature and/or online  identification guides. .  396 websites. .  396 infomaterials development. 
 406–407 book covers. .  406 Mike the Myxo (comic strip). .  407   408 photo guides. .  406 postcards. .  406 posters. 
 406 powerpoint slide. .  406 visual educational tool. .  407 information on  citizen-science approaches. .  416 communication channels. 
 problems  associated. .  415 language barriers impact. .  415 multilanguage effort. .  415 lack of moisture in desert environments. 
 316 learning outcomes and suggested learning  activities. .  390 as model organisms. .  154 cell cycle. .  154 first complete genome. .  164 group I introns in. 
 157–160 biological mechanisms and  functions. .  157 homing endonuclease gene (HEG). .  158 host proteins. 
 for splicing. .  158 in large subunit (LSU) ribosomal DNA  (rDNA) genes. 
 157 mode of horizontal transmission. .  158 modes of dispersal and evolution. 
 157 open reading frame (ORF). .  159 Physarales. 
 157 somatic incompatibility systems. .  155 transfection. 
 of Physarum polycephalum  and rNAi. .  162–164 phylogenetic studies in. .  91   108 phytosociology of. 
 336 populations. .  302 position within eukaryotic tree of life. .  93 relationships based on mitochondrial DNA  characteristics. 
 114 teaching usage. .  391 tree branches. .  95–100 tree of life. .  92–95 uses. 
 316 Myxomycetes from North India. .  59 The Myxomycetes monograph. .  3 The Myxomycetes of Great Britain. 
 46 Myxomycetes of India. .  60 The Myxomycetes of Japan. .  63 Myxomycetophagy. 
 284 N Nagoya protocol. .  337 Naphthoquinone pigments. .  184   185 National Botanic Garden in Madrid. .  51 National Fungus Collections (BPI) in  Beltsville. 
 2 the Naturalist. .  46 Nematodes. .  300 Neotropics. 
 305 Neotropical myxomycetes. .  312 Nivicolous myxomycetes. .  23   315   345 ecological group of. .  336 in moist chamber cultures. 
 346 Nodes. .  23 Nomenclature. .  definition of. 
 206–210 NomenMyx. .  242 Nomenmyx. .  a nomenclatural database. 
 51 Noncytidine insertions. .  134 Nonheterothallic (homothallism). .  22 Nontemplated nucleotide insertions. .  133 Nontranscribed spacer (NTS). 
 86 North American Slime Moulds. .  48 448    Index Notices of British fungi. .  44 Nova Genera Plantarum. .  43 NTS  See Nontranscribed spacer (NTS)  Nucleic acids. 
 85 amplification. .  148 cytochrome c oxidase (COI). .  150 denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  (DGGE). .  151–152 elongation factor-1α (EF-1α). 
 149 high-throughput sequencing (HTS). .  152 internal transcribed spacer (ITS). .  149 polymerase chain reaction (PCR). .  148 ribosomal small subunit (SSU). .  148 sequencing and applications of. .  150 terminal restriction fragment length  polymorphism (TRFLP). 
 151 workflow of. .  151 environmental sampling of. .  357 isolation. 
 of myxomycete. .  147 DNA isolation. .  147 alkaline lysis protocol. 
 147 amoeboflagellate cells. .  147 carbohydrate contamination. .  147 disruption of cell wall. .  147 from fruiting bodies. .  147 isolation kit. 
 147 method for breaking spore. .  147 microcysts. .  147 plasmodia. .  147 RNA isolation. .  148 functional role. .  of gene/ taxon. 
 148 measurement. .  of gene expression. .  148 metatranscriptomes. 
 148 sterile and RNase-free  environment. .  148 transcriptome analysis. .  148 Nucleolar minichromosome. .  107 nucleolar DNA/rDNA genes. .  107–108 Nucleotides. .  110   121 sequences. .  84 templated. 
 134 Nucleotide triphosphates (NTP). .  90 Nucletmycea. 
 92 O Observational skills development. .  397–400 expedition. .  role of   399 fruiting bodies. 
 examination of. .  397 myxomycete life cycle. .  stages of. 
 397 Amazing Slime Mold (time-lapse  videos). .  397 Are You Smarter Than a Slime Mold?  (time-lapse videos). .  397 cell division. 
 teaching of. .  397 photomicrographs. .  397 Slime Molds I. .  II   and III (films). .  397 spore germination. 
 direct observation  of. .  399 time-lapse photography. .  397 time-lapse videos. 
 397 myxomycetes usage. .  397 myxomycete terrarium. 
 400 objective. .  399 primed terrarium. .  400 sample collection by children. .  400 terrarium usage. .  400 Ockham’s razor. 
 91 9   12-Octadecadienoic acid. .  190 9-Octadecenoic acid. 
 190 Olea europaea. .  312 Oligonema schweinitzii. 
 17 Online courses. .  415 Open reading frame (ORF). .  121 Operational taxonomic units (OTUs). 
 152 Operculum. .  24 of Licea kleistobolus. .  215 Opisthokonta. .  84 Optical character recognition (OCR). 
 239 Oreocereus trolli. .  341 Oxidative phosphorylation. 
 116   123 P Panckow. .  Thomas   41 Paradiacheopsis erythropodia. .  53 Paradiacheopsis fimbriata. .  49   310 Paradiacheopsis rigida. .  314 Parasexual cycle. .  37 Patagonian steppe. 
 346 PCR  See Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)  Peptides lactone. .  190 Perichaena areolata. .  319 Perichaena calongei. .  24   304   342 Perichaena chrysosperma. 
 4 Perichaena depressa. .  24   278 Perichaena echinolophospora. .  312 Perichaena liceoides. .  281   315 Perichaena madagascariensis. .  312 Perichaena microspora. 
 24   52 Perichaena minor. .  22 Perichaena pulcherrima. 
 65 Perichaena quadrata. .  24 Perichaena reticulospora. .  24 Perichaena syncarpon. .  16 Peridium. .  13   24   205   212 Persoon. 
 Charles   43 Index     449 Pertusaria albescens. .  310 Pesudomonas pyocyaneum. 
 193 Petri dish  culture. .  349 slow-drying moisture. .  342 of sterile. .  351 on Whatman number. 
 342 Phagocytosis. .  24 Phalacrocorax carbo. .  317 Phaneroplasmodial species. .  4   178 Phaneroplasmodium. .  5   8   24   215   218 Phenotypes. .  85 evolutionary relationships. 
 85 Philomycus carolinianus. .  29 Philomycus flexuolaris. .  29 Photographing. 
 myxomycetes. .  407–410 cell phones. .  by   407 with digital camera. 
 409 ISO setting. .  408 macro lens. 
 use of   407 scanning or transmission electron  micrographs. .  use of   407 with sophisticated camera. .  410 unicellular stages. 
 407 Photosynthetic organisms. .  92 Phylema. .  84 PhyloCode. 
 225 Phylogenetic classification. .  84 Phylogenetic hypotheses. .  91 Phylogenetic tree. .  comparisons of core  sequences. 
 130 Phylogeny. .  84 genealogical relationships. 
 84 hierarchical classifications. .  84 outline. 
 98 Phylograms. .  91 Phylum. .  84 Physaraceae. .  88 Physarales. .  4   28   129   157   214   303 order. 
 218   233 phylogenetic analysis of. .  157 Physarella oblonga. 
 25 antimicrobial activities. .  369 Botrytis cinerea. .  against   369 Fusarium oxysporum. .  against   369 Rhizoctonia solani. 
 against   369 crude extracts composition. .  369 plasmodial extracts composition. 
 369 Physarina echinospora. .  319 Physaroid. .  24 Physarum. .  375 Badhamia. .  differences. 
 219 biochemical oscillators. .  as   375 computing and sensing devices. .  importance  in. 
 375 foraging behavior. .  379 maze experiment. .  375   376 shortest path finding. 
 375–376 chemoattraction. .  role of   376 protoplasmic network. .  role of   375 physiology and behavior. .  375 protoplasm streaming. .  375 space exploration. .  379 terrain model of United States. 
 380 Physarum atacamense. .  304   349 Physarum bogoriense. .  24 Physarum brunneolum. .  12   312 Physarum chromosomes. 
 109   110   112 Physarum cinereum. .  4   282 Physarum. 
 codon/anticodon rules. .  113 Physarum compressum. .  4   209   271   309 Physarum confertum. .  310 Physarum dictyospermum. .  67 Physarum didermoides. .  309 Physarum echinosporum. 
 314 world distribution map. .  314 Physarum flavicomum. .  158 slimy substances. .  glucoprotein. 
 366 Physarum genome. .  107 Physarum globuliferum. 
 177   352 on cornmeal agar. .  352 Physarum gyrosum. .  282   353 Bacillus cereus. 
 inhibition of. .  366 Bacillus subtilis. 
 inhibition of. .  366 change in split germination in. .  176 Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
 inhibition of. .  366 Staphylococcus aureus. .  inhibition of. 
 366 Physarum leucophaeum. .  278 Physarum melleum. .  177 activity against Bacillus subtilis. .  369 plasmodium crude extract. 
 369 Physarum networks  evaluation and approximation. .  377 in geographical regions. .  377 migration. .  378 Randic index. 
 378 trans-African transport. .  379 vs  motorway networks. .  377 Physarum nudum. .  180 Physarum polycephalum. .  4   5   68   87   107    178   193   343   353   365   372 baffled fermenters. 
 growth in. .  374 biodiesel production. .  373 biomass production. .  365 composite map of mtDNA from strains. 
 118 culture. .  365 450    Index fatty acids from. .  189 fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs)  analysis. 
 373 growth. .  365 heterothallic life cycle. .  9 industrial applications. 
 365 life cycle. .  374 fruiting bodies. .  374 multinucleate plasmodium. 
 374 maze solving. .  376 terrain model of the United States. .  380 trans-African transport. 
 379 single-celled myxamoebae. .  374 spores. 
 374 lipid analysis. .  373 mtDNA. .  gene content. .  124 nucleic acid amplification. .  149 plasmodium of. 
 365 laboratory culture. .  372 polycefin isolation. .  372 transfection of. 
 162 cat gene. .  162 chloramphenicol transferase (cat)  gene. 
 163 enhanced yellow fluorescent protein  (EYFP). .  163 genomic sequences. .  identification. 
 163 homologous gene replacement. .  163 introduction. 
 foreign DNA. .  162 myxamoebal cells. .  treatment with CaCl2/ polyethylene. 
 162 origin of replication. .  162 PardC promoter. .  163 transient chloramphenicol transferase  (cat) expression. 
 162 Physarum pseudonotabile. .  304 Physarum rigidum. .  physarigins A-C  isolation. 
 373 Physarum serpula. .  4 Physarum stellatum. .  25 Physarum superbum. .  4   309 Physarum tesselatum. .  64 Physarum virescens. .  310 Pinocytosis. 
 24 Pinus kesiya. .  318 Pinus sylvestris. 
 272 Planetary Biodiversity Inventories (PBI). .  243 Plant biomass. .  274 Plant litter  decomposition. 
 273 microhabitat. .  273 Plant specimen dryer. 
 portable   334 Plasmodial structure/motility/behavior/ learning. .  myxomycetes as model  organisms. 
 155–156 behavioral titration. .  156 ectoplasmic gel layer. 
 155 hydraulic pressure. .  155 plasma membrane. .  155 plasmodial chemotaxis. .  156 role of calcium. 
 155 Plasmodiocarp. .  5 Plasmodiocarpous. .  215   217 Plasmodium. 
 6   19   32   127   147   175   178    205   210   214   216   299   300   365 associated with potassium concentration. .  179 ATP   178 attraction by food sources. .  178 degree of polymerization of actin. .  178 genetics. 
 37 membranes and pseudopods. .  34 morphological details. 
 178 myxomyosin. .  178 production of antibiotics. .  180 proteins. .  types   179 protoplasmic organelles and inclusions. 
 33 reversible streaming. .  of protoplasm. .  178 rhodamine-phosphatidylethanolamine (Rh- PE). .  180 sclerotia. .  178 size   178 slime precursor. .  180 sporulation. .  179 stage. 
 373   374  See also Physarum computation stage, 375 distinctive multinucleate trophic (feeding)  stage, 373 foraging behavior, 374 myxomycete computing, role in, 374 protoplasmic network, 374 vs. . microplasmodia. 
 374 types of. .  32   178 velocity. 
 of vesicles. .  180 Plasmodium-forming units (PFU). .  337 Plasmogamy. 
 24   37 Platanus occidentalis. .  277 Polyacetylene triglycerides. .  183 Polycefin. 
 372 morpholino antisense oligonucleotides. .   targeted delivery of. .  372 nontoxic. .  nonimmunogenic. .  and  biodegradable nanoconjugate drug  delivery system. 
 372 Physarum polycephalum. .  isolation from. .  372 synthesis. 
 372 Physarum polycephalum (cont.) Index     451 Polycistronic transcripts. .  126 Polymailc acid (PMLA). .  193 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). .  89   129    148   355 reverse transcriptase. .  355 Polymerases. .  132 Polymorphic helices. .  87 Polyphyletic taxa. 
 85 Polypropionate lactone glycosides. .  184   368 lycogalinosides A. .  368 lycogalinosides B. .  368 Polysphondylium pallidum. .  115 Postmeiosis mitotic divisions. 
 in spore   353 Ppl.L1925 intron. .  158 Present volume cover. .  alternative   option. 
 417 Prokaryotes. .  85 Protein coding  genes. .  86   88   123   126   132 sequence. 
 110 Protists. .  389 Protoplasmodium. .  24   178   215–217     228   276 Protostelids. 
 212   213 Prototrichia metallica. .  66 Pseudoaethalium. .  6 Pseudocapillitium. .  6   25   214 Pseudocolumella. .  25 Pseudomonas luteola. .  281 Pseudo-trees. 
 92 Pulvinate. .  25 Purine-pyrimidine dinucleotide. .  133 Purine-pyrimidine nucleotides. .  135 Puya spp.. 
 334   349 Pyrimidines. .  132   133 Pyrroloiminoquinones. .  189 Q Quercus forests. .  313 R Ravenel. .  Henry William. .  44 Recording myxomycetes. 
 333 field collections. .  334–337 advantages/constraints. .  339–340 Reniform. .  25 Replacement editing. 
 121 Reproductive patterns. .  210 Research perspectives. .  419–424 academically affiliated researchers. .  role of    419 applied research. .  422 bi- or multiparty research agreements. 
 421 fruiting bodies occurrence. .  421 funding opportunities. 
 419 GBIF platform records. .  421 genera. .  distribution of. 
 421 international guidelines. .  421 intraacademic merging and collaboration  development. 
 role of   422 legal international limitations. .  422 material transfer agreements. 
 421 molecular analyses of myxomycetes. .  424 myxomycete collections. 
 419 myxomycete relationships with  environment. .  419 myxomycete research projects. 
 dependence  on. .  423 human expertise. .  423 infrastructural/equipment capabilities. .  423 regulatory framework. .  421 researchers training. 
 419 Reticularia. .  100   301 Reticulariaceae. 
 99 Retrotransposition. .  137 Reversal effect of vincristine (VCR). 
 184 Reverse transcription method (RT-PCR). .  355 Reversible protoplasmic streaming. .  25 Ribonucleic acid (RNA). .  85 editing sites. 
 132 cDNA/mtDNA alignments for six  myxomycetes. .  136 evolution and variation location. .  135 fixation. .  138 location specificity. 
 133 genes. .  extrachromosomal copies. 
 86 polymerase. .  134 mitochondrial. .  134 self-splicing. .  121 small noncoding. 
 112 Ribosomal DNA (rDNA). .  86 replication. .  107 sequences. 
 114 Ribosomal small subunit (SSU). .  148 Ribosomes. .  86 RNA  See Ribonucleic acid (RNA)  Robot controllers development. 
 382 Physarum. .  role of   382 cytoplasm shuttling. 
 382 electrical potential oscillations. .  382 emotional controller. 
 382 multiple-electrode array inoculation. .  382 nutrients stimulation. 
 382 Rostafinski. .  Pole Józef Tomasz. .  46 Rostafinski’s classification. 
 222 452    Index S Saccharomyces cerevisiae. .  158 Salmonella typhimurium. .  193 Sanger sequencing. 
 90 checking. .  90 SAR kingdoms. 
 92 Schäffer. .  Jakob Christian. 
 42 Schizoplasmodiids. .  114 Schrader. .  Heinrich Adolph. .  43 Schumacher. .  Heinrich Christian Friedrich. 
 44 Scientific literacy approaches. .  414 Sclerotia. .  357 observations of. .  349 Sclerotium. .  25 Scopoli. .  Giovanni Antonio. 
 42 Selenocysteine. .  113 Semimorula liquescens. .  302 Sensing technology  myxomycete. 
 role of   374–383 Sibling species. .  209 Sigmasterol. .  192 Single-rope technique. 
 280 Sinistral. .  25 β-Sitosterol. .  190 Slime molds  acrasid. 
 212 cellular. .  213 dictyostelids. .  212 protostelids. .  212 Slugs. 
 300 Small subunit ribosomal RNA gene  (SSU rRNA). .  355 Soil amoebae. .  356 Soil-inhabiting nivicolous myxomycetes. 
 315 Sorogena. .  299 Species. .  206 complexes. 
 209 definition. .  209 generic name. .  206 specific epithet. .  206 Sphagnum-rich spruce woodlands. 
 310 Spherules (macrocysts). .  26   160 Spliceosomal introns. 
 88   110 Sporangium. .  4   6 Spores   26   205   345 color. .  214   217 dispersal. .  for myxomycetes. 
 299 features of. .  299–301 endosporous. .  212 exosporous. .  212 germination. .  in myxomycetes. 
 175   213    217   281 age of. .  175 methods. 
 176 optimal temperature for. .  175 osmosis. 
 176 percentage of. .  175   176 time requirement. .  175   176 wetting agents. 
 176 haploid. .  205 mass   26   219 myxomycetes. .  301 production. 
 216 Sporophore development. .  epihypothallic. .  217 Sporulation. .  26   181 incubation period. .  181 mitosis. .  181 starvation. .  181 18S rRNA gene (SSU). .  303 Stalk. 
 26 Staphylococcus aureus. .  193 Stemonitales. .  4   28   129 order. .  283 Stemonitidales. .  214 Stemonitidales. 
 order   219   235 Stemonitis. .  335 Stemonitis axifera. .  300   310 Stemonitis echinulata. 
 66 Stemonitis flavogenita. .  177 Stemonitis fusca. .  66   278   317 Stemonitis herbatica. .  34   373 3  4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA). .   commercial production of. 
 373 Stemonitis smithii. .  11   28 sporangium. 
 11 Stemonitis splendens. .  275 Stereum hirsutum. .  350 Stereum pieces. 
 350 Sterile PCR tube. .  350 Stigmasterol. .  189 Stipe. .  205 Stokes’ Law. 
 28   300 Stout gardening. .  334 Subalpine meadows. .  315 Sub-Antarctic region. .  2 Subhypothallic development. 
 26 Succulenticolous myxomycetes. .  26 Suomen Limasienet (The Myxomycetes of  Finland). 
 55 Surface net. .  27 Sutures. 
 27 Swarm cell. .  27 Symphytocarpus. .  301 Symphytocarpus trechisporus. .  310 Index     453 Synchronous nuclear division. .  27 Syngamy. 
 27 Systema Mycologicum. .  44   210 Systema Plantarum. .  42 Systematics  definition of. .  206–210 within myxomycetes. 
 212–221 T Tactile sensor development. .  380–381 Physarum. .  role of   380 tactile bristle. 
 381 Taiga. .  310 Tartigrades. 
 300 Taxonomic classification. .  205 Taxonomic literature (TL). .  221   240 Taxonomic research. 
 209 Taxonomists. .  238   239   244 Taxonomy. 
 205 challenges in. .  244–245 definition of. 
 205–210 morphological features. .  role in   205 of myxomycetes. 
 205 history. .  210–212 phylogenetic revolution. 
 85–86 technologies to resolve problems. .  237–244 databanks. .  242 herbaria. .  240–241 projects. 
 241 repositories of biodiversity information. .  241 software. .  244 virtual encyclopedias. .  243 virtual libraries. .  240–241 web pages. 
 243 Taxonomy of the Indian Myxomycetes. .  60 Telomeres. .  109 Temperate deciduous forests. 
 311 Terminal restriction fragment length  polymorphism (TRFLP). .  151   355 Terminal velocity. .  300 Tetrahymena thermophila. .  158 Thawing. .  351 Thread phase stage. .  213 Tode   Heinrich   43 Trabecula. 
 27 TRAIL  See Tumor necrosis factor-related  apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)  Transcriptome analysis, 132, 133 Tree topology, 136 TRFLP. . See Terminal restriction fragment  length polymorphism (TRFLP)  Trichia brunnea, 17, 281 Trichia contorta, 217 Trichia decipiens, 31, 101 Trichia favoginea, 17, 193 Trichia favoginea var. . persimilis. 
 371 3-epitrichiol acetate isolation. .  371 kehokorins A-C isolation. .  371 trichiol isolation. 
 371 Trichia florifomis. .  13 Trichiales clade. .  4   129   214 Trichiales. 
 order   217   231 capillitium. .  218 Trichia persimilis. .  314 Trichia sordida. .  346 Trichia synsporon. 
 16 Trichia varia. .  300 Trichia varia var. . fimicola   53 Trichiol. .  HeLa cells  cytotoxicity against. 
 371 Triple helix. .  418 tRNA  anticodons. .  codon/anticodon interactions  and genetic code. .  113 gene structure. .  112 Trophic states. 
 27 Trypanosomes. .  131–132   137 mitochondria of. .  133 Tryptophan. .  113 Tubifera. .  100   301   339 Tubifera dimorphotheca. .  371 tubiferal A. .  extraction and purification. .  371 tubiferal B. 
 extraction and purification. .  371 Tubifera ferruginosa. .  6–8 Tubiferal A  vincristine-resistant KB cell lines. .  antitumor  activity against. 
 371 Tubifera spp.. .  301 Tubiferic acid. .  184 Tubular (hollow) vs. 
solid   27 Tubulifera (Tubifera) arachnoidea. .  31   184 Tubulifera decipiens. 
 31 Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis- inducing ligand (TRAIL). .  371 cancer treatment. 
 use in   371 Twigs. .  341 Type specimen. .  209 Tyrosine kinases. .  110 U Ubiquist vs. . moderate endemicity model. 
 304 Unconventional computing  maze experiment. .  role of   375–376 454    Index myxomycete. .  role of   374–383 Physarum branching. .  impact of. 
 377 Physarum protoplasmic networks. .  role of   377 spanning tree. .  finite planar set. 
 role of   377 transport networks approximation. .  role of    377–378 Unikonts. 
 schematic phylogenetic trees. .  116 University of Iowa Myxomycete Collection. 
 2 Unweighted Pair Group Method. .  91 Uridines. .  131 V Vertebrates. 
 proteins in. .  85 Vesicles. 
 27 Video-based online strategies. .  415 Vincristine-resistant KB/VJ300 cells. .  371 Virtual Biodiversity Research and  Access Network for Taxonomy  (ViBRANT). .  241 Virtual herbarium. .  241 von Albertini. .  Johannes Baptiste. 
 44 von Haller. .  Albrecht   42 von Schweinitz. .  Ludwig David. 
 44 Voronin. .  Mikhail Stepanovich. 
 46 W Wallroth. .  Carl Friedrich Wilhelm. .  44 Warted (verrucose). .  27 Watson- Crick base. 
 133 Waxy (oil droplets). .  27 Wetting. 
 351 Where the Slime Mould Creeps. .  66 Willkommlangea reticulata. 
